[[overview]]
= Overview of Jet

Jet is a distributed data processing engine that treats the data as a
stream. It can process both static datasets (i.e., _batch jobs_) and
live event streams. It can compute aggregate functions over infinite
data streams by using the concept of <<kinds-of-windows, _windowing_>>:
dividing the stream into a sequence of subsets (windows) and applying
the aggregate function over each window.

With unbounded event streams there arises the issue of failures in the
cluster. Jet can <<fault-tolerance, tolerate failures>> of individual
members without loss, offering the _exactly-once_ processing guarantee.

You deploy Jet to a cluster of machines and then submit your processing
jobs to it. Jet will automatically make all the cluster members
participate in processing your data. It can <<source-sink-connectors,
connect>> to a distributed data source such as Kafka, Hadoop Distributed
File System, or a Hazelcast IMDG cluster. Each member of the Jet cluster
will consume a slice of the distributed data, which makes it easy to
scale up to any level of throughput.

Jet is built on top of the Hazelcast IMDG technology and thanks to this
the Jet cluster can also play the role of the data source and sink. If
you use Jet this way, you can achieve perfect data locality and
top-of-the-class throughputs.

image::jet-architecture.png[Architecture Overview,align="center"]

The main programming paradigm you'll use with Jet is that of a
_processing pipeline_, which is a network of interconnected _stages_.
The stages form a _directed acyclic graph_ (a DAG) and the connections
between them indicate the path along which the data flows. Data
processing happens inside each stage. You describe the pipeline using
the <<pipeline-api, Pipeline API>>.

Internally Jet converts the pipeline into its native representation, the
<<dag, Core API DAG>>, which describes the layout of the processing
units and the rules for routing the data between them. It is possible to
use the Core API to directly create the native representation, but it's
much more complex and error-prone.

To run the computation Jet uses a <<cooperative-multithreading,
cooperative multithreading>> execution engine, which means it can run
many Core API `Processor` s on the same JVM thread. A processor
corresponds to a standalone single-threaded task that processes a stream
of data. The processors are implemented in such a way that they don't
block the thread while waiting for more data, or while waiting for the
receiving processor to accept it. By not depending on OS-level thread
scheduling Jet can achieve greater throughput and better saturate the
CPU cores. It can also drive many more processors than the OS can
manage native threads.
