The Project Gutenberg EBook of Through the Looking-Glass, by
Charles Dodgson                         AKA Lewis Carroll

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Through the Looking-Glass

Author: Charles Dodgson, AKA Lewis Carroll

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #12]
Release Date: February, 1991
Last Updated: October 6, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS ***










THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS

By Lewis Carroll


The Millennium Fulcrum Edition 1.7




CHAPTER I. Looking-Glass house

One thing was certain, that the WHITE kitten had had nothing to do with
it:--it was the black kitten’s fault entirely. For the white kitten had
been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter of
an hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering); so you see that it
COULDN’T have had any hand in the mischief.

The way Dinah washed her children’s faces was this: first she held the
poor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw she
rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and
just now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which was
lying quite still and trying to purr--no doubt feeling that it was all
meant for its good.

But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon,
and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the great
arm-chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had been
having a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been
trying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had all
come undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearth-rug, all
knots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in the
middle.

‘Oh, you wicked little thing!’ cried Alice, catching up the kitten, and
giving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace.
‘Really, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You OUGHT,
Dinah, you know you ought!’ she added, looking reproachfully at the old
cat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage--and then she
scrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worsted
with her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn’t get on
very fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten, and
sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee, pretending to
watch the progress of the winding, and now and then putting out one
paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be glad to help, if it
might.

‘Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty?’ Alice began. ‘You’d have guessed
if you’d been up in the window with me--only Dinah was making you tidy,
so you couldn’t. I was watching the boys getting in sticks for the
bonfire--and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so cold, and
it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we’ll go and
see the bonfire to-morrow.’ Here Alice wound two or three turns of the
worsted round the kitten’s neck, just to see how it would look: this led
to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor, and yards
and yards of it got unwound again.

‘Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,’ Alice went on as soon as they were
comfortably settled again, ‘when I saw all the mischief you had been
doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you out into
the snow! And you’d have deserved it, you little mischievous darling!
What have you got to say for yourself? Now don’t interrupt me!’ she
went on, holding up one finger. ‘I’m going to tell you all your faults.
Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your face this
morning. Now you can’t deny it, Kitty: I heard you! What’s that you
say?’ (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) ‘Her paw went into your
eye? Well, that’s YOUR fault, for keeping your eyes open--if you’d
shut them tight up, it wouldn’t have happened. Now don’t make any more
excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulled Snowdrop away by the tail
just as I had put down the saucer of milk before her! What, you were
thirsty, were you? How do you know she wasn’t thirsty too? Now for
number three: you unwound every bit of the worsted while I wasn’t
looking!

‘That’s three faults, Kitty, and you’ve not been punished for any of
them yet. You know I’m saving up all your punishments for Wednesday
week--Suppose they had saved up all MY punishments!’ she went on,
talking more to herself than the kitten. ‘What WOULD they do at the end
of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the day came.
Or--let me see--suppose each punishment was to be going without a
dinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go without
fifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldn’t mind THAT much! I’d far rather
go without them than eat them!

‘Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, Kitty? How nice and soft
it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all over outside.
I wonder if the snow LOVES the trees and fields, that it kisses them so
gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with a white quilt;
and perhaps it says, “Go to sleep, darlings, till the summer comes
again.” And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, they dress
themselves all in green, and dance about--whenever the wind blows--oh,
that’s very pretty!’ cried Alice, dropping the ball of worsted to clap
her hands. ‘And I do so WISH it was true! I’m sure the woods look sleepy
in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.

‘Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don’t smile, my dear, I’m asking it
seriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just as
if you understood it: and when I said “Check!” you purred! Well, it WAS
a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn’t been for
that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces. Kitty, dear,
let’s pretend--’ And here I wish I could tell you half the things Alice
used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase ‘Let’s pretend.’ She
had had quite a long argument with her sister only the day before--all
because Alice had begun with ‘Let’s pretend we’re kings and queens;’ and
her sister, who liked being very exact, had argued that they couldn’t,
because there were only two of them, and Alice had been reduced at last
to say, ‘Well, YOU can be one of them then, and I’LL be all the rest.’
And once she had really frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly in
her ear, ‘Nurse! Do let’s pretend that I’m a hungry hyaena, and you’re a
bone.’

But this is taking us away from Alice’s speech to the kitten. ‘Let’s
pretend that you’re the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if you
sat up and folded your arms, you’d look exactly like her. Now do try,
there’s a dear!’ And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it
up before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thing
didn’t succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn’t
fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to the
Looking-glass, that it might see how sulky it was--‘and if you’re not
good directly,’ she added, ‘I’ll put you through into Looking-glass
House. How would you like THAT?’

‘Now, if you’ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, I’ll tell you
all my ideas about Looking-glass House. First, there’s the room you can
see through the glass--that’s just the same as our drawing room, only
the things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon a
chair--all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I could
see THAT bit! I want so much to know whether they’ve a fire in the
winter: you never CAN tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, and then
smoke comes up in that room too--but that may be only pretence, just to
make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books are something
like our books, only the words go the wrong way; I know that, because
I’ve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they hold up one in
the other room.

‘How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, Kitty? I wonder if
they’d give you milk in there? Perhaps Looking-glass milk isn’t good
to drink--But oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see a
little PEEP of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave the door
of our drawing-room wide open: and it’s very like our passage as far
as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond.
Oh, Kitty! how nice it would be if we could only get through into
Looking-glass House! I’m sure it’s got, oh! such beautiful things in it!
Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting through into it, somehow, Kitty.
Let’s pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that we can get
through. Why, it’s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare! It’ll be
easy enough to get through--’ She was up on the chimney-piece while she
said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. And certainly
the glass WAS beginning to melt away, just like a bright silvery mist.

In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightly
down into the Looking-glass room. The very first thing she did was
to look whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite
pleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as
the one she had left behind. ‘So I shall be as warm here as I was in the
old room,’ thought Alice: ‘warmer, in fact, because there’ll be no one
here to scold me away from the fire. Oh, what fun it’ll be, when they
see me through the glass in here, and can’t get at me!’

Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen from
the old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the rest
was as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the
wall next the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on
the chimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it in the
Looking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned at her.

‘They don’t keep this room so tidy as the other,’ Alice thought to
herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearth among
the cinders: but in another moment, with a little ‘Oh!’ of surprise, she
was down on her hands and knees watching them. The chessmen were walking
about, two and two!

‘Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,’ Alice said (in a whisper, for
fear of frightening them), ‘and there are the White King and the White
Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel--and here are two castles
walking arm in arm--I don’t think they can hear me,’ she went on, as she
put her head closer down, ‘and I’m nearly sure they can’t see me. I feel
somehow as if I were invisible--’

Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made her
turn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over and
begin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what would
happen next.

‘It is the voice of my child!’ the White Queen cried out as she rushed
past the King, so violently that she knocked him over among the cinders.
‘My precious Lily! My imperial kitten!’ and she began scrambling wildly
up the side of the fender.

‘Imperial fiddlestick!’ said the King, rubbing his nose, which had been
hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a LITTLE annoyed with the Queen,
for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.

Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily was
nearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen and
set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.

The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air had
quite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could do nothing
but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she had recovered her
breath a little, she called out to the White King, who was sitting
sulkily among the ashes, ‘Mind the volcano!’

‘What volcano?’ said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, as if
he thought that was the most likely place to find one.

‘Blew--me--up,’ panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath.
‘Mind you come up--the regular way--don’t get blown up!’

Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar,
till at last she said, ‘Why, you’ll be hours and hours getting to the
table, at that rate. I’d far better help you, hadn’t I?’ But the King
took no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he could neither
hear her nor see her.

So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowly
than she had lifted the Queen, that she mightn’t take his breath away:
but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as well dust
him a little, he was so covered with ashes.

She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a face
as the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisible
hand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, but
his eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder
and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly let
him drop upon the floor.

‘Oh! PLEASE don’t make such faces, my dear!’ she cried out, quite
forgetting that the King couldn’t hear her. ‘You make me laugh so that
I can hardly hold you! And don’t keep your mouth so wide open! All the
ashes will get into it--there, now I think you’re tidy enough!’ she
added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near the
Queen.

The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still: and
Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round the room
to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, she could
find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with it she
found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking together in a
frightened whisper--so low, that Alice could hardly hear what they said.

The King was saying, ‘I assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the very
ends of my whiskers!’

To which the Queen replied, ‘You haven’t got any whiskers.’

‘The horror of that moment,’ the King went on, ‘I shall never, NEVER
forget!’

‘You will, though,’ the Queen said, ‘if you don’t make a memorandum of
it.’

Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous
memorandum-book out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thought
struck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came some
way over his shoulder, and began writing for him.

The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencil
for some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong for him,
and at last he panted out, ‘My dear! I really MUST get a thinner pencil.
I can’t manage this one a bit; it writes all manner of things that I
don’t intend--’

‘What manner of things?’ said the Queen, looking over the book (in which
Alice had put ‘THE WHITE KNIGHT IS SLIDING DOWN THE POKER. HE BALANCES
VERY BADLY’) ‘That’s not a memorandum of YOUR feelings!’

There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she sat
watching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him,
and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again),
she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read,
‘--for it’s all in some language I don’t know,’ she said to herself.

It was like this.


             YKCOWREBBAJ

     sevot yhtils eht dna,gillirb sawT’
      ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD
        ,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA
       .ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnA


She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thought struck
her. ‘Why, it’s a Looking-glass book, of course! And if I hold it up to
a glass, the words will all go the right way again.’

This was the poem that Alice read.


             JABBERWOCKY

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

     ‘Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
      The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
     Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
      The frumious Bandersnatch!’

     He took his vorpal sword in hand:
      Long time the manxome foe he sought--
     So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
      And stood awhile in thought.

     And as in uffish thought he stood,
      The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
     Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
      And burbled as it came!

     One, two! One, two! And through and through
      The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
     He left it dead, and with its head
      He went galumphing back.

     ‘And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
      Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
     O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!’
      He chortled in his joy.

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.


‘It seems very pretty,’ she said when she had finished it, ‘but it’s
RATHER hard to understand!’ (You see she didn’t like to confess, even
to herself, that she couldn’t make it out at all.) ‘Somehow it seems
to fill my head with ideas--only I don’t exactly know what they are!
However, SOMEBODY killed SOMETHING: that’s clear, at any rate--’

‘But oh!’ thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, ‘if I don’t make haste I
shall have to go back through the Looking-glass, before I’ve seen what
the rest of the house is like! Let’s have a look at the garden first!’
She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs--or, at least,
it wasn’t exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting down
stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept the
tips of her fingers on the hand-rail, and floated gently down without
even touching the stairs with her feet; then she floated on through the
hall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, if
she hadn’t caught hold of the door-post. She was getting a little giddy
with so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herself
walking again in the natural way.




CHAPTER II. The Garden of Live Flowers

‘I should see the garden far better,’ said Alice to herself, ‘if I could
get to the top of that hill: and here’s a path that leads straight to
it--at least, no, it doesn’t do that--’ (after going a few yards along
the path, and turning several sharp corners), ‘but I suppose it will
at last. But how curiously it twists! It’s more like a corkscrew than a
path! Well, THIS turn goes to the hill, I suppose--no, it doesn’t! This
goes straight back to the house! Well then, I’ll try it the other way.’

And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, but
always coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, when
she turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it
before she could stop herself.

‘It’s no use talking about it,’ Alice said, looking up at the house and
pretending it was arguing with her. ‘I’m NOT going in again yet. I know
I should have to get through the Looking-glass again--back into the old
room--and there’d be an end of all my adventures!’

So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set out once more
down the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill.
For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, ‘I really
SHALL do it this time--’ when the path gave a sudden twist and shook
itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found
herself actually walking in at the door.

‘Oh, it’s too bad!’ she cried. ‘I never saw such a house for getting in
the way! Never!’

However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be
done but start again. This time she came upon a large flower-bed, with a
border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.

‘O Tiger-lily,’ said Alice, addressing herself to one that was waving
gracefully about in the wind, ‘I WISH you could talk!’

‘We CAN talk,’ said the Tiger-lily: ‘when there’s anybody worth talking
to.’

Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite
seemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only went
on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice--almost in a whisper.
‘And can ALL the flowers talk?’

‘As well as YOU can,’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘And a great deal louder.’

‘It isn’t manners for us to begin, you know,’ said the Rose, ‘and I
really was wondering when you’d speak! Said I to myself, “Her face has
got SOME sense in it, though it’s not a clever one!” Still, you’re the
right colour, and that goes a long way.’

‘I don’t care about the colour,’ the Tiger-lily remarked. ‘If only her
petals curled up a little more, she’d be all right.’

Alice didn’t like being criticised, so she began asking questions.
‘Aren’t you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobody
to take care of you?’

‘There’s the tree in the middle,’ said the Rose: ‘what else is it good
for?’

‘But what could it do, if any danger came?’ Alice asked.

‘It says “Bough-wough!”’ cried a Daisy: ‘that’s why its branches are
called boughs!’

‘Didn’t you know THAT?’ cried another Daisy, and here they all began
shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill
voices. ‘Silence, every one of you!’ cried the Tiger-lily, waving itself
passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement. ‘They
know I can’t get at them!’ it panted, bending its quivering head towards
Alice, ‘or they wouldn’t dare to do it!’

‘Never mind!’ Alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to the
daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, ‘If you don’t
hold your tongues, I’ll pick you!’

There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned
white.

‘That’s right!’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘The daisies are worst of all. When
one speaks, they all begin together, and it’s enough to make one wither
to hear the way they go on!’

‘How is it you can all talk so nicely?’ Alice said, hoping to get it
into a better temper by a compliment. ‘I’ve been in many gardens before,
but none of the flowers could talk.’

‘Put your hand down, and feel the ground,’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘Then
you’ll know why.’

Alice did so. ‘It’s very hard,’ she said, ‘but I don’t see what that has
to do with it.’

‘In most gardens,’ the Tiger-lily said, ‘they make the beds too soft--so
that the flowers are always asleep.’

This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to know it.
‘I never thought of that before!’ she said.

‘It’s MY opinion that you never think AT ALL,’ the Rose said in a rather
severe tone.

‘I never saw anybody that looked stupider,’ a Violet said, so suddenly,
that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn’t spoken before.

‘Hold YOUR tongue!’ cried the Tiger-lily. ‘As if YOU ever saw anybody!
You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there, till you know
no more what’s going on in the world, than if you were a bud!’

‘Are there any more people in the garden besides me?’ Alice said, not
choosing to notice the Rose’s last remark.

‘There’s one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,’
said the Rose. ‘I wonder how you do it--’ (‘You’re always wondering,’
said the Tiger-lily), ‘but she’s more bushy than you are.’

‘Is she like me?’ Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed her mind,
‘There’s another little girl in the garden, somewhere!’

‘Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,’ the Rose said, ‘but she’s
redder--and her petals are shorter, I think.’

‘Her petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,’ the Tiger-lily
interrupted: ‘not tumbled about anyhow, like yours.’

‘But that’s not YOUR fault,’ the Rose added kindly: ‘you’re beginning
to fade, you know--and then one can’t help one’s petals getting a little
untidy.’

Alice didn’t like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, she asked
‘Does she ever come out here?’

‘I daresay you’ll see her soon,’ said the Rose. ‘She’s one of the thorny
kind.’

‘Where does she wear the thorns?’ Alice asked with some curiosity.

‘Why all round her head, of course,’ the Rose replied. ‘I was wondering
YOU hadn’t got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.’

‘She’s coming!’ cried the Larkspur. ‘I hear her footstep, thump, thump,
thump, along the gravel-walk!’

Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it was the Red Queen. ‘She’s
grown a good deal!’ was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alice
first found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high--and
here she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!

‘It’s the fresh air that does it,’ said the Rose: ‘wonderfully fine air
it is, out here.’

‘I think I’ll go and meet her,’ said Alice, for, though the flowers were
interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to have a talk
with a real Queen.

‘You can’t possibly do that,’ said the Rose: ‘_I_ should advise you to
walk the other way.’

This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off at
once towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in a
moment, and found herself walking in at the front-door again.

A little provoked, she drew back, and after looking everywhere for the
queen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought she
would try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.

It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before she
found herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of the
hill she had been so long aiming at.

‘Where do you come from?’ said the Red Queen. ‘And where are you going?
Look up, speak nicely, and don’t twiddle your fingers all the time.’

Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as she
could, that she had lost her way.

‘I don’t know what you mean by YOUR way,’ said the Queen: ‘all the ways
about here belong to ME--but why did you come out here at all?’ she
added in a kinder tone. ‘Curtsey while you’re thinking what to say, it
saves time.’

Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of the
Queen to disbelieve it. ‘I’ll try it when I go home,’ she thought to
herself, ‘the next time I’m a little late for dinner.’

‘It’s time for you to answer now,’ the Queen said, looking at her watch:
‘open your mouth a LITTLE wider when you speak, and always say “your
Majesty.”’

‘I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty--’

‘That’s right,’ said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alice
didn’t like at all, ‘though, when you say “garden,”--I’VE seen gardens,
compared with which this would be a wilderness.’

Alice didn’t dare to argue the point, but went on: ‘--and I thought I’d
try and find my way to the top of that hill--’

‘When you say “hill,”’ the Queen interrupted, ‘_I_ could show you hills,
in comparison with which you’d call that a valley.’

‘No, I shouldn’t,’ said Alice, surprised into contradicting her at last:
‘a hill CAN’T be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense--’

The Red Queen shook her head, ‘You may call it “nonsense” if you like,’
she said, ‘but I’VE heard nonsense, compared with which that would be as
sensible as a dictionary!’

Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the Queen’s tone that she
was a LITTLE offended: and they walked on in silence till they got to
the top of the little hill.

For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in all
directions over the country--and a most curious country it was. There
were a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it from side
to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by a number
of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.

‘I declare it’s marked out just like a large chessboard!’ Alice said at
last. ‘There ought to be some men moving about somewhere--and so there
are!’ She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quick
with excitement as she went on. ‘It’s a great huge game of chess that’s
being played--all over the world--if this IS the world at all, you know.
Oh, what fun it is! How I WISH I was one of them! I wouldn’t mind being
a Pawn, if only I might join--though of course I should LIKE to be a
Queen, best.’

She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but her
companion only smiled pleasantly, and said, ‘That’s easily managed. You
can be the White Queen’s Pawn, if you like, as Lily’s too young to
play; and you’re in the Second Square to begin with: when you get to
the Eighth Square you’ll be a Queen--’ Just at this moment, somehow or
other, they began to run.

Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how it
was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand
in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep
up with her: and still the Queen kept crying ‘Faster! Faster!’ but Alice
felt she COULD NOT go faster, though she had not breath left to say so.

The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other
things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they
went, they never seemed to pass anything. ‘I wonder if all the things
move along with us?’ thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemed to
guess her thoughts, for she cried, ‘Faster! Don’t try to talk!’

Not that Alice had any idea of doing THAT. She felt as if she would
never be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: and
still the Queen cried ‘Faster! Faster!’ and dragged her along. ‘Are we
nearly there?’ Alice managed to pant out at last.

‘Nearly there!’ the Queen repeated. ‘Why, we passed it ten minutes ago!
Faster!’ And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistling
in Alice’s ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.

‘Now! Now!’ cried the Queen. ‘Faster! Faster!’ And they went so fast
that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching the
ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite
exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground,
breathless and giddy.

The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, ‘You may rest
a little now.’

Alice looked round her in great surprise. ‘Why, I do believe we’ve been
under this tree the whole time! Everything’s just as it was!’

‘Of course it is,’ said the Queen, ‘what would you have it?’

‘Well, in OUR country,’ said Alice, still panting a little, ‘you’d
generally get to somewhere else--if you ran very fast for a long time,
as we’ve been doing.’

‘A slow sort of country!’ said the Queen. ‘Now, HERE, you see, it takes
all the running YOU can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to
get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!’

‘I’d rather not try, please!’ said Alice. ‘I’m quite content to stay
here--only I AM so hot and thirsty!’

‘I know what YOU’D like!’ the Queen said good-naturedly, taking a little
box out of her pocket. ‘Have a biscuit?’

Alice thought it would not be civil to say ‘No,’ though it wasn’t at all
what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could: and it
was VERY dry; and she thought she had never been so nearly choked in all
her life.

‘While you’re refreshing yourself,’ said the Queen, ‘I’ll just take
the measurements.’ And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in
inches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs in here
and there.

‘At the end of two yards,’ she said, putting in a peg to mark the
distance, ‘I shall give you your directions--have another biscuit?’

‘No, thank you,’ said Alice: ‘one’s QUITE enough!’

‘Thirst quenched, I hope?’ said the Queen.

Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did not
wait for an answer, but went on. ‘At the end of THREE yards I shall
repeat them--for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of FOUR, I
shall say good-bye. And at the end of FIVE, I shall go!’

She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on
with great interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowly
walking down the row.

At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said, ‘A pawn goes two squares
in its first move, you know. So you’ll go VERY quickly through the Third
Square--by railway, I should think--and you’ll find yourself in the
Fourth Square in no time. Well, THAT square belongs to Tweedledum and
Tweedledee--the Fifth is mostly water--the Sixth belongs to Humpty
Dumpty--But you make no remark?’

‘I--I didn’t know I had to make one--just then,’ Alice faltered out.

‘You SHOULD have said, “It’s extremely kind of you to tell me all
this”--however, we’ll suppose it said--the Seventh Square is all
forest--however, one of the Knights will show you the way--and in the
Eighth Square we shall be Queens together, and it’s all feasting and
fun!’ Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.

At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said, ‘Speak
in French when you can’t think of the English for a thing--turn out your
toes as you walk--and remember who you are!’ She did not wait for Alice
to curtsey this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where she
turned for a moment to say ‘good-bye,’ and then hurried on to the last.

How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the last
peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether she
ran quickly into the wood (‘and she CAN run very fast!’ thought Alice),
there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began to
remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her to
move.




CHAPTER III. Looking-Glass Insects

Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of the
country she was going to travel through. ‘It’s something very like
learning geography,’ thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of
being able to see a little further. ‘Principal rivers--there ARE none.
Principal mountains--I’m on the only one, but I don’t think it’s got any
name. Principal towns--why, what ARE those creatures, making honey down
there? They can’t be bees--nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know--’
and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them that was
bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis into them, ‘just
as if it was a regular bee,’ thought Alice.

However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact it was an
elephant--as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breath
away at first. ‘And what enormous flowers they must be!’ was her next
idea. ‘Something like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put
to them--and what quantities of honey they must make! I think I’ll go
down and--no, I won’t JUST yet,’ she went on, checking herself just as
she was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excuse
for turning shy so suddenly. ‘It’ll never do to go down among them
without a good long branch to brush them away--and what fun it’ll be
when they ask me how I like my walk. I shall say--“Oh, I like it well
enough--“’ (here came the favourite little toss of the head), ‘“only it
was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!”’

‘I think I’ll go down the other way,’ she said after a pause: ‘and
perhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to get
into the Third Square!’

So with this excuse she ran down the hill and jumped over the first of
the six little brooks.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Tickets, please!’ said the Guard, putting his head in at the window.
In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about the same
size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.

‘Now then! Show your ticket, child!’ the Guard went on, looking angrily
at Alice. And a great many voices all said together (‘like the chorus of
a song,’ thought Alice), ‘Don’t keep him waiting, child! Why, his time
is worth a thousand pounds a minute!’

‘I’m afraid I haven’t got one,’ Alice said in a frightened tone: ‘there
wasn’t a ticket-office where I came from.’ And again the chorus of
voices went on. ‘There wasn’t room for one where she came from. The land
there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!’

‘Don’t make excuses,’ said the Guard: ‘you should have bought one from
the engine-driver.’ And once more the chorus of voices went on with ‘The
man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a thousand
pounds a puff!’

Alice thought to herself, ‘Then there’s no use in speaking.’ The
voices didn’t join in this time, as she hadn’t spoken, but to her
great surprise, they all THOUGHT in chorus (I hope you understand what
THINKING IN CHORUS means--for I must confess that _I_ don’t), ‘Better
say nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!’

‘I shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!’ thought
Alice.

All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope,
then through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. At last he
said, ‘You’re travelling the wrong way,’ and shut up the window and went
away.

‘So young a child,’ said the gentleman sitting opposite to her (he was
dressed in white paper), ‘ought to know which way she’s going, even if
she doesn’t know her own name!’

A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his
eyes and said in a loud voice, ‘She ought to know her way to the
ticket-office, even if she doesn’t know her alphabet!’

There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queer
carriage-full of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be
that they should all speak in turn, HE went on with ‘She’ll have to go
back from here as luggage!’

Alice couldn’t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarse voice
spoke next. ‘Change engines--’ it said, and was obliged to leave off.

‘It sounds like a horse,’ Alice thought to herself. And an extremely
small voice, close to her ear, said, ‘You might make a joke on
that--something about “horse” and “hoarse,” you know.’

Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, ‘She must be labelled
“Lass, with care,” you know--’

And after that other voices went on (‘What a number of people there are
in the carriage!’ thought Alice), saying, ‘She must go by post, as she’s
got a head on her--’ ‘She must be sent as a message by the telegraph--’
‘She must draw the train herself the rest of the way--’ and so on.

But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whispered
in her ear, ‘Never mind what they all say, my dear, but take a
return-ticket every time the train stops.’

‘Indeed I shan’t!’ Alice said rather impatiently. ‘I don’t belong to
this railway journey at all--I was in a wood just now--and I wish I
could get back there.’

‘You might make a joke on THAT,’ said the little voice close to her ear:
‘something about “you WOULD if you could,” you know.’

‘Don’t tease so,’ said Alice, looking about in vain to see where the
voice came from; ‘if you’re so anxious to have a joke made, why don’t
you make one yourself?’

The little voice sighed deeply: it was VERY unhappy, evidently, and
Alice would have said something pitying to comfort it, ‘If it would only
sigh like other people!’ she thought. But this was such a wonderfully
small sigh, that she wouldn’t have heard it at all, if it hadn’t come
QUITE close to her ear. The consequence of this was that it tickled her
ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from the unhappiness of
the poor little creature.

‘I know you are a friend,’ the little voice went on; ‘a dear friend, and
an old friend. And you won’t hurt me, though I AM an insect.’

‘What kind of insect?’ Alice inquired a little anxiously. What she
really wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but she
thought this wouldn’t be quite a civil question to ask.

‘What, then you don’t--’ the little voice began, when it was drowned by
a shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm, Alice
among the rest.

The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it in
and said, ‘It’s only a brook we have to jump over.’ Everybody seemed
satisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of
trains jumping at all. ‘However, it’ll take us into the Fourth Square,
that’s some comfort!’ she said to herself. In another moment she felt
the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright she caught
at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be the Goat’s beard.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she found
herself sitting quietly under a tree--while the Gnat (for that was the
insect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig just over
her head, and fanning her with its wings.

It certainly was a VERY large Gnat: ‘about the size of a chicken,’ Alice
thought. Still, she couldn’t feel nervous with it, after they had been
talking together so long.

‘--then you don’t like all insects?’ the Gnat went on, as quietly as if
nothing had happened.

‘I like them when they can talk,’ Alice said. ‘None of them ever talk,
where _I_ come from.’

‘What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where YOU come from?’ the Gnat
inquired.

‘I don’t REJOICE in insects at all,’ Alice explained, ‘because I’m
rather afraid of them--at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the
names of some of them.’

‘Of course they answer to their names?’ the Gnat remarked carelessly.

‘I never knew them to do it.’

‘What’s the use of their having names,’ the Gnat said, ‘if they won’t
answer to them?’

‘No use to THEM,’ said Alice; ‘but it’s useful to the people who name
them, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?’

‘I can’t say,’ the Gnat replied. ‘Further on, in the wood down there,
they’ve got no names--however, go on with your list of insects: you’re
wasting time.’

‘Well, there’s the Horse-fly,’ Alice began, counting off the names on
her fingers.

‘All right,’ said the Gnat: ‘half way up that bush, you’ll see a
Rocking-horse-fly, if you look. It’s made entirely of wood, and gets
about by swinging itself from branch to branch.’

‘What does it live on?’ Alice asked, with great curiosity.

‘Sap and sawdust,’ said the Gnat. ‘Go on with the list.’

Alice looked up at the Rocking-horse-fly with great interest, and made
up her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so bright
and sticky; and then she went on.

‘And there’s the Dragon-fly.’

‘Look on the branch above your head,’ said the Gnat, ‘and there you’ll
find a snap-dragon-fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings of
holly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.’

‘And what does it live on?’

‘Frumenty and mince pie,’ the Gnat replied; ‘and it makes its nest in a
Christmas box.’

‘And then there’s the Butterfly,’ Alice went on, after she had taken
a good look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought to
herself, ‘I wonder if that’s the reason insects are so fond of flying
into candles--because they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!’

‘Crawling at your feet,’ said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back in
some alarm), ‘you may observe a Bread-and-Butterfly. Its wings are thin
slices of Bread-and-butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump
of sugar.’

‘And what does IT live on?’

‘Weak tea with cream in it.’

A new difficulty came into Alice’s head. ‘Supposing it couldn’t find
any?’ she suggested.

‘Then it would die, of course.’

‘But that must happen very often,’ Alice remarked thoughtfully.

‘It always happens,’ said the Gnat.

After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnat
amused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last
it settled again and remarked, ‘I suppose you don’t want to lose your
name?’

‘No, indeed,’ Alice said, a little anxiously.

‘And yet I don’t know,’ the Gnat went on in a careless tone: ‘only think
how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home without it!
For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons, she
would call out “come here--,” and there she would have to leave off,
because there wouldn’t be any name for her to call, and of course you
wouldn’t have to go, you know.’

‘That would never do, I’m sure,’ said Alice: ‘the governess would never
think of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldn’t remember my name,
she’d call me “Miss!” as the servants do.’

‘Well, if she said “Miss,” and didn’t say anything more,’ the Gnat
remarked, ‘of course you’d miss your lessons. That’s a joke. I wish YOU
had made it.’

‘Why do you wish _I_ had made it?’ Alice asked. ‘It’s a very bad one.’

But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rolling down
its cheeks.

‘You shouldn’t make jokes,’ Alice said, ‘if it makes you so unhappy.’

Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time the
poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice
looked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as
she was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and
walked on.

She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side of
it: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a LITTLE
timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up her
mind to go on: ‘for I certainly won’t go BACK,’ she thought to herself,
and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.

‘This must be the wood,’ she said thoughtfully to herself, ‘where
things have no names. I wonder what’ll become of MY name when I go in?
I shouldn’t like to lose it at all--because they’d have to give me
another, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then
the fun would be trying to find the creature that had got my old
name! That’s just like the advertisements, you know, when people lose
dogs--“ANSWERS TO THE NAME OF ‘DASH:’ HAD ON A BRASS COLLAR”--just fancy
calling everything you met “Alice,” till one of them answered! Only they
wouldn’t answer at all, if they were wise.’

She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it looked
very cool and shady. ‘Well, at any rate it’s a great comfort,’ she
said as she stepped under the trees, ‘after being so hot, to get into
the--into WHAT?’ she went on, rather surprised at not being able to
think of the word. ‘I mean to get under the--under the--under THIS, you
know!’ putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. ‘What DOES it call
itself, I wonder? I do believe it’s got no name--why, to be sure it
hasn’t!’

She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again.
‘Then it really HAS happened, after all! And now, who am I? I WILL
remember, if I can! I’m determined to do it!’ But being determined
didn’t help much, and all she could say, after a great deal of puzzling,
was, ‘L, I KNOW it begins with L!’

Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its large
gentle eyes, but didn’t seem at all frightened. ‘Here then! Here then!’
Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it only
started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.

‘What do you call yourself?’ the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweet
voice it had!

‘I wish I knew!’ thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly,
‘Nothing, just now.’

‘Think again,’ it said: ‘that won’t do.’

Alice thought, but nothing came of it. ‘Please, would you tell me
what YOU call yourself?’ she said timidly. ‘I think that might help a
little.’

‘I’ll tell you, if you’ll move a little further on,’ the Fawn said. ‘I
can’t remember here.’

So they walked on together though the wood, Alice with her arms clasped
lovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out into
another open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air,
and shook itself free from Alice’s arms. ‘I’m a Fawn!’ it cried out in a
voice of delight, ‘and, dear me! you’re a human child!’ A sudden look of
alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment it had
darted away at full speed.

Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation at
having lost her dear little fellow-traveller so suddenly. ‘However, I
know my name now.’ she said, ‘that’s SOME comfort. Alice--Alice--I won’t
forget it again. And now, which of these finger-posts ought I to follow,
I wonder?’

It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only one
road through the wood, and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.
‘I’ll settle it,’ Alice said to herself, ‘when the road divides and they
point different ways.’

But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way,
but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two finger-posts
pointing the same way, one marked ‘TO TWEEDLEDUM’S HOUSE’ and the other
‘TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.’

‘I do believe,’ said Alice at last, ‘that they live in the same house! I
wonder I never thought of that before--But I can’t stay there long. I’ll
just call and say “how d’you do?” and ask them the way out of the wood.
If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!’ So she
wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning a sharp
corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she could not
help starting back, but in another moment she recovered herself, feeling
sure that they must be.




CHAPTER IV. Tweedledum And Tweedledee

They were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the other’s
neck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them
had ‘DUM’ embroidered on his collar, and the other ‘DEE.’ ‘I suppose
they’ve each got “TWEEDLE” round at the back of the collar,’ she said to
herself.

They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she was
just looking round to see if the word “TWEEDLE” was written at the back
of each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the one
marked ‘DUM.’

‘If you think we’re wax-works,’ he said, ‘you ought to pay, you know.
Wax-works weren’t made to be looked at for nothing, nohow!’

‘Contrariwise,’ added the one marked ‘DEE,’ ‘if you think we’re alive,
you ought to speak.’

‘I’m sure I’m very sorry,’ was all Alice could say; for the words of the
old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock, and
she could hardly help saying them out loud:--


     ‘Tweedledum and Tweedledee
      Agreed to have a battle;
     For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
      Had spoiled his nice new rattle.

     Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
      As black as a tar-barrel;
     Which frightened both the heroes so,
      They quite forgot their quarrel.’

‘I know what you’re thinking about,’ said Tweedledum: ‘but it isn’t so,
nohow.’

‘Contrariwise,’ continued Tweedledee, ‘if it was so, it might be; and if
it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.’

‘I was thinking,’ Alice said very politely, ‘which is the best way out
of this wood: it’s getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?’

But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.

They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alice
couldn’t help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying ‘First Boy!’

‘Nohow!’ Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again with
a snap.

‘Next Boy!’ said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quite
certain he would only shout out ‘Contrariwise!’ and so he did.

‘You’ve been wrong!’ cried Tweedledum. ‘The first thing in a visit is to
say “How d’ye do?” and shake hands!’ And here the two brothers gave each
other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free, to
shake hands with her.

Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear
of hurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the best way out of the
difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment they
were dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered
afterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: it
seemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it was
done (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing one
across the other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks.

‘But it certainly WAS funny,’ (Alice said afterwards, when she was
telling her sister the history of all this,) ‘to find myself singing
“HERE WE GO ROUND THE MULBERRY BUSH.” I don’t know when I began it, but
somehow I felt as if I’d been singing it a long long time!’

The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. ‘Four times
round is enough for one dance,’ Tweedledum panted out, and they left
off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at the same
moment.

Then they let go of Alice’s hands, and stood looking at her for a
minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didn’t know how to
begin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. ‘It
would never do to say “How d’ye do?” NOW,’ she said to herself: ‘we seem
to have got beyond that, somehow!’

‘I hope you’re not much tired?’ she said at last.

‘Nohow. And thank you VERY much for asking,’ said Tweedledum.

‘So much obliged!’ added Tweedledee. ‘You like poetry?’

‘Ye-es, pretty well--SOME poetry,’ Alice said doubtfully. ‘Would you
tell me which road leads out of the wood?’

‘What shall I repeat to her?’ said Tweedledee, looking round at
Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice’s question.

‘“THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER” is the longest,’ Tweedledum replied,
giving his brother an affectionate hug.

Tweedledee began instantly:

       ‘The sun was shining--’

Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. ‘If it’s VERY long,’ she said, as
politely as she could, ‘would you please tell me first which road--’

Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:

     ‘The sun was shining on the sea,
      Shining with all his might:
     He did his very best to make
      The billows smooth and bright--
     And this was odd, because it was
      The middle of the night.

     The moon was shining sulkily,
      Because she thought the sun
     Had got no business to be there
      After the day was done--
     “It’s very rude of him,” she said,
      “To come and spoil the fun!”

     The sea was wet as wet could be,
      The sands were dry as dry.
     You could not see a cloud, because
      No cloud was in the sky:
     No birds were flying over head--
      There were no birds to fly.

     The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Were walking close at hand;
     They wept like anything to see
      Such quantities of sand:
     “If this were only cleared away,”
       They said, “it WOULD be grand!”

     “If seven maids with seven mops
      Swept it for half a year,
     Do you suppose,” the Walrus said,
      “That they could get it clear?”
      “I doubt it,” said the Carpenter,
      And shed a bitter tear.

     “O Oysters, come and walk with us!”
       The Walrus did beseech.
     “A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
      Along the briny beach:
     We cannot do with more than four,
      To give a hand to each.”

     The eldest Oyster looked at him.
      But never a word he said:
     The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
      And shook his heavy head--
     Meaning to say he did not choose
      To leave the oyster-bed.

     But four young oysters hurried up,
      All eager for the treat:
     Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
      Their shoes were clean and neat--
     And this was odd, because, you know,
      They hadn’t any feet.

     Four other Oysters followed them,
      And yet another four;
     And thick and fast they came at last,
      And more, and more, and more--
     All hopping through the frothy waves,
      And scrambling to the shore.

     The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Walked on a mile or so,
     And then they rested on a rock
      Conveniently low:
     And all the little Oysters stood
      And waited in a row.

     “The time has come,” the Walrus said,
      “To talk of many things:
     Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
      Of cabbages--and kings--
     And why the sea is boiling hot--
      And whether pigs have wings.”

     “But wait a bit,” the Oysters cried,
      “Before we have our chat;
     For some of us are out of breath,
      And all of us are fat!”
      “No hurry!” said the Carpenter.
      They thanked him much for that.

     “A loaf of bread,” the Walrus said,
      “Is what we chiefly need:
     Pepper and vinegar besides
      Are very good indeed--
     Now if you’re ready Oysters dear,
      We can begin to feed.”

     “But not on us!” the Oysters cried,
      Turning a little blue,
     “After such kindness, that would be
      A dismal thing to do!”
      “The night is fine,” the Walrus said
      “Do you admire the view?

     “It was so kind of you to come!
      And you are very nice!”
      The Carpenter said nothing but
      “Cut us another slice:
     I wish you were not quite so deaf--
      I’ve had to ask you twice!”

     “It seems a shame,” the Walrus said,
      “To play them such a trick,
     After we’ve brought them out so far,
      And made them trot so quick!”
      The Carpenter said nothing but
      “The butter’s spread too thick!”

     “I weep for you,” the Walrus said.
      “I deeply sympathize.”
      With sobs and tears he sorted out
      Those of the largest size.
     Holding his pocket handkerchief
      Before his streaming eyes.

     “O Oysters,” said the Carpenter.
      “You’ve had a pleasant run!
     Shall we be trotting home again?”
       But answer came there none--
     And that was scarcely odd, because
      They’d eaten every one.’

‘I like the Walrus best,’ said Alice: ‘because you see he was a LITTLE
sorry for the poor oysters.’

‘He ate more than the Carpenter, though,’ said Tweedledee. ‘You see he
held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn’t count how
many he took: contrariwise.’

‘That was mean!’ Alice said indignantly. ‘Then I like the Carpenter
best--if he didn’t eat so many as the Walrus.’

‘But he ate as many as he could get,’ said Tweedledum.

This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, ‘Well! They were BOTH
very unpleasant characters--’ Here she checked herself in some alarm,
at hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large
steam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely
to be a wild beast. ‘Are there any lions or tigers about here?’ she
asked timidly.

‘It’s only the Red King snoring,’ said Tweedledee.

‘Come and look at him!’ the brothers cried, and they each took one of
Alice’s hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.

‘Isn’t he a LOVELY sight?’ said Tweedledum.

Alice couldn’t say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-cap on,
with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy heap,
and snoring loud--‘fit to snore his head off!’ as Tweedledum remarked.

‘I’m afraid he’ll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,’ said Alice,
who was a very thoughtful little girl.

‘He’s dreaming now,’ said Tweedledee: ‘and what do you think he’s
dreaming about?’

Alice said ‘Nobody can guess that.’

‘Why, about YOU!’ Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands triumphantly.
‘And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose you’d be?’

‘Where I am now, of course,’ said Alice.

‘Not you!’ Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. ‘You’d be nowhere. Why,
you’re only a sort of thing in his dream!’

‘If that there King was to wake,’ added Tweedledum, ‘you’d go
out--bang!--just like a candle!’

‘I shouldn’t!’ Alice exclaimed indignantly. ‘Besides, if I’M only a sort
of thing in his dream, what are YOU, I should like to know?’

‘Ditto’ said Tweedledum.

‘Ditto, ditto’ cried Tweedledee.

He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn’t help saying, ‘Hush! You’ll
be waking him, I’m afraid, if you make so much noise.’

‘Well, it no use YOUR talking about waking him,’ said Tweedledum, ‘when
you’re only one of the things in his dream. You know very well you’re
not real.’

‘I AM real!’ said Alice and began to cry.

‘You won’t make yourself a bit realler by crying,’ Tweedledee remarked:
‘there’s nothing to cry about.’

‘If I wasn’t real,’ Alice said--half-laughing through her tears, it all
seemed so ridiculous--‘I shouldn’t be able to cry.’

‘I hope you don’t suppose those are real tears?’ Tweedledum interrupted
in a tone of great contempt.

‘I know they’re talking nonsense,’ Alice thought to herself: ‘and it’s
foolish to cry about it.’ So she brushed away her tears, and went on as
cheerfully as she could. ‘At any rate I’d better be getting out of the
wood, for really it’s coming on very dark. Do you think it’s going to
rain?’

Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and
looked up into it. ‘No, I don’t think it is,’ he said: ‘at least--not
under HERE. Nohow.’

‘But it may rain OUTSIDE?’

‘It may--if it chooses,’ said Tweedledee: ‘we’ve no objection.
Contrariwise.’

‘Selfish things!’ thought Alice, and she was just going to say
‘Good-night’ and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the
umbrella and seized her by the wrist.

‘Do you see THAT?’ he said, in a voice choking with passion, and
his eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a
trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.

‘It’s only a rattle,’ Alice said, after a careful examination of the
little white thing. ‘Not a rattleSNAKE, you know,’ she added hastily,
thinking that he was frightened: ‘only an old rattle--quite old and
broken.’

‘I knew it was!’ cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and
tear his hair. ‘It’s spoilt, of course!’ Here he looked at Tweedledee,
who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under
the umbrella.

Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, ‘You
needn’t be so angry about an old rattle.’

‘But it isn’t old!’ Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever. ‘It’s
new, I tell you--I bought it yesterday--my nice new RATTLE!’ and his
voice rose to a perfect scream.

All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,
with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it
quite took off Alice’s attention from the angry brother. But he couldn’t
quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the
umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and shutting
his mouth and his large eyes--‘looking more like a fish than anything
else,’ Alice thought.

‘Of course you agree to have a battle?’ Tweedledum said in a calmer
tone.

‘I suppose so,’ the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the
umbrella: ‘only SHE must help us to dress up, you know.’

So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returned
in a minute with their arms full of things--such as bolsters, blankets,
hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. ‘I hope you’re
a good hand at pinning and tying strings?’ Tweedledum remarked. ‘Every
one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.’

Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about anything
in all her life--the way those two bustled about--and the quantity of
things they put on--and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and
fastening buttons--‘Really they’ll be more like bundles of old clothes
than anything else, by the time they’re ready!’ she said to herself, as
she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, ‘to keep his head
from being cut off,’ as he said.

‘You know,’ he added very gravely, ‘it’s one of the most serious things
that can possibly happen to one in a battle--to get one’s head cut off.’

Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear
of hurting his feelings.

‘Do I look very pale?’ said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet
tied on. (He CALLED it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more
like a saucepan.)

‘Well--yes--a LITTLE,’ Alice replied gently.

‘I’m very brave generally,’ he went on in a low voice: ‘only to-day I
happen to have a headache.’

‘And I’VE got a toothache!’ said Tweedledee, who had overheard the
remark. ‘I’m far worse off than you!’

‘Then you’d better not fight to-day,’ said Alice, thinking it a good
opportunity to make peace.

‘We MUST have a bit of a fight, but I don’t care about going on long,’
said Tweedledum. ‘What’s the time now?’

Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said ‘Half-past four.’

‘Let’s fight till six, and then have dinner,’ said Tweedledum.

‘Very well,’ the other said, rather sadly: ‘and SHE can watch us--only
you’d better not come VERY close,’ he added: ‘I generally hit everything
I can see--when I get really excited.’

‘And _I_ hit everything within reach,’ cried Tweedledum, ‘whether I can
see it or not!’

Alice laughed. ‘You must hit the TREES pretty often, I should think,’
she said.

Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. ‘I don’t suppose,’
he said, ‘there’ll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by
the time we’ve finished!’

‘And all about a rattle!’ said Alice, still hoping to make them a LITTLE
ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.

‘I shouldn’t have minded it so much,’ said Tweedledum, ‘if it hadn’t
been a new one.’

‘I wish the monstrous crow would come!’ thought Alice.

‘There’s only one sword, you know,’ Tweedledum said to his brother:
‘but you can have the umbrella--it’s quite as sharp. Only we must begin
quick. It’s getting as dark as it can.’

‘And darker,’ said Tweedledee.

It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a
thunderstorm coming on. ‘What a thick black cloud that is!’ she said.
‘And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it’s got wings!’

‘It’s the crow!’ Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and
the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.

Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.
‘It can never get at me HERE,’ she thought: ‘it’s far too large to
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn’t flap its wings
so--it makes quite a hurricane in the wood--here’s somebody’s shawl
being blown away!’




CHAPTER V. Wool and Water

She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in
another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,
with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very
civilly went to meet her with the shawl.

‘I’m very glad I happened to be in the way,’ Alice said, as she helped
her to put on her shawl again.

The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of way,
and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded like
‘bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,’ and Alice felt that if there was
to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she began
rather timidly: ‘Am I addressing the White Queen?’

‘Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,’ The Queen said. ‘It isn’t MY
notion of the thing, at all.’

Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very
beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, ‘If your
Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I’ll do it as well as
I can.’

‘But I don’t want it done at all!’ groaned the poor Queen. ‘I’ve been
a-dressing myself for the last two hours.’

It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had got
some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. ‘Every
single thing’s crooked,’ Alice thought to herself, ‘and she’s all over
pins!--may I put your shawl straight for you?’ she added aloud.

‘I don’t know what’s the matter with it!’ the Queen said, in a
melancholy voice. ‘It’s out of temper, I think. I’ve pinned it here, and
I’ve pinned it there, but there’s no pleasing it!’

‘It CAN’T go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,’ Alice
said, as she gently put it right for her; ‘and, dear me, what a state
your hair is in!’

‘The brush has got entangled in it!’ the Queen said with a sigh. ‘And I
lost the comb yesterday.’

Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair
into order. ‘Come, you look rather better now!’ she said, after altering
most of the pins. ‘But really you should have a lady’s maid!’

‘I’m sure I’ll take you with pleasure!’ the Queen said. ‘Twopence a
week, and jam every other day.’

Alice couldn’t help laughing, as she said, ‘I don’t want you to hire
ME--and I don’t care for jam.’

‘It’s very good jam,’ said the Queen.

‘Well, I don’t want any TO-DAY, at any rate.’

‘You couldn’t have it if you DID want it,’ the Queen said. ‘The rule is,
jam to-morrow and jam yesterday--but never jam to-day.’

‘It MUST come sometimes to “jam to-day,”’ Alice objected.

‘No, it can’t,’ said the Queen. ‘It’s jam every OTHER day: to-day isn’t
any OTHER day, you know.’

‘I don’t understand you,’ said Alice. ‘It’s dreadfully confusing!’

‘That’s the effect of living backwards,’ the Queen said kindly: ‘it
always makes one a little giddy at first--’

‘Living backwards!’ Alice repeated in great astonishment. ‘I never heard
of such a thing!’

‘--but there’s one great advantage in it, that one’s memory works both
ways.’

‘I’m sure MINE only works one way,’ Alice remarked. ‘I can’t remember
things before they happen.’

‘It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,’ the Queen
remarked.

‘What sort of things do YOU remember best?’ Alice ventured to ask.

‘Oh, things that happened the week after next,’ the Queen replied in a
careless tone. ‘For instance, now,’ she went on, sticking a large piece
of plaster on her finger as she spoke, ‘there’s the King’s
Messenger. He’s in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn’t
even begin till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of
all.’

‘Suppose he never commits the crime?’ said Alice.

‘That would be all the better, wouldn’t it?’ the Queen said, as she
bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.

Alice felt there was no denying THAT. ‘Of course it would be all
the better,’ she said: ‘but it wouldn’t be all the better his being
punished.’

‘You’re wrong THERE, at any rate,’ said the Queen: ‘were YOU ever
punished?’

‘Only for faults,’ said Alice.

‘And you were all the better for it, I know!’ the Queen said
triumphantly.

‘Yes, but then I HAD done the things I was punished for,’ said Alice:
‘that makes all the difference.’

‘But if you HADN’T done them,’ the Queen said, ‘that would have been
better still; better, and better, and better!’ Her voice went higher
with each ‘better,’ till it got quite to a squeak at last.

Alice was just beginning to say ‘There’s a mistake somewhere--,’ when
the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence
unfinished. ‘Oh, oh, oh!’ shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as
if she wanted to shake it off. ‘My finger’s bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!’

Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, that
Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.

‘What IS the matter?’ she said, as soon as there was a chance of making
herself heard. ‘Have you pricked your finger?’

‘I haven’t pricked it YET,’ the Queen said, ‘but I soon shall--oh, oh,
oh!’

‘When do you expect to do it?’ Alice asked, feeling very much inclined
to laugh.

‘When I fasten my shawl again,’ the poor Queen groaned out: ‘the brooch
will come undone directly. Oh, oh!’ As she said the words the brooch
flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it
again.

‘Take care!’ cried Alice. ‘You’re holding it all crooked!’ And she
caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the
Queen had pricked her finger.

‘That accounts for the bleeding, you see,’ she said to Alice with a
smile. ‘Now you understand the way things happen here.’

‘But why don’t you scream now?’ Alice asked, holding her hands ready to
put over her ears again.

‘Why, I’ve done all the screaming already,’ said the Queen. ‘What would
be the good of having it all over again?’

By this time it was getting light. ‘The crow must have flown away, I
think,’ said Alice: ‘I’m so glad it’s gone. I thought it was the night
coming on.’

‘I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!’ the Queen said. ‘Only I never
can remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and
being glad whenever you like!’

‘Only it is so VERY lonely here!’ Alice said in a melancholy voice; and
at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling down her
cheeks.

‘Oh, don’t go on like that!’ cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands in
despair. ‘Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long way
you’ve come to-day. Consider what o’clock it is. Consider anything, only
don’t cry!’

Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.
‘Can YOU keep from crying by considering things?’ she asked.

‘That’s the way it’s done,’ the Queen said with great decision: ‘nobody
can do two things at once, you know. Let’s consider your age to begin
with--how old are you?’

‘I’m seven and a half exactly.’

‘You needn’t say “exactually,”’ the Queen remarked: ‘I can believe
it without that. Now I’ll give YOU something to believe. I’m just one
hundred and one, five months and a day.’

‘I can’t believe THAT!’ said Alice.

‘Can’t you?’ the Queen said in a pitying tone. ‘Try again: draw a long
breath, and shut your eyes.’

Alice laughed. ‘There’s no use trying,’ she said: ‘one CAN’T believe
impossible things.’

‘I daresay you haven’t had much practice,’ said the Queen. ‘When I was
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes
the shawl again!’

The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blew
the Queen’s shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her arms
again, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded in catching
it for herself. ‘I’ve got it!’ she cried in a triumphant tone. ‘Now you
shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!’

‘Then I hope your finger is better now?’ Alice said very politely, as
she crossed the little brook after the Queen.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Oh, much better!’ cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as she
went on. ‘Much be-etter! Be-etter! Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!’ The last
word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.

She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself up
in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn’t make out
what had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really--was it
really a SHEEP that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rub as
she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a little dark
shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to her was
an old Sheep, sitting in an arm-chair knitting, and every now and then
leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.

‘What is it you want to buy?’ the Sheep said at last, looking up for a
moment from her knitting.

‘I don’t QUITE know yet,’ Alice said, very gently. ‘I should like to
look all round me first, if I might.’

‘You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,’ said the
Sheep: ‘but you can’t look ALL round you--unless you’ve got eyes at the
back of your head.’

But these, as it happened, Alice had NOT got: so she contented herself
with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.

The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things--but the
oddest part of it all was, that whenever she looked hard at any shelf,
to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was always
quite empty: though the others round it were crowded as full as they
could hold.

‘Things flow about so here!’ she said at last in a plaintive tone, after
she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright thing,
that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a work-box, and was
always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. ‘And this one
is the most provoking of all--but I’ll tell you what--’ she added, as a
sudden thought struck her, ‘I’ll follow it up to the very top shelf of
all. It’ll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!’

But even this plan failed: the ‘thing’ went through the ceiling as
quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.

‘Are you a child or a teetotum?’ the Sheep said, as she took up another
pair of needles. ‘You’ll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning round
like that.’ She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice
couldn’t help looking at her in great astonishment.

‘How CAN she knit with so many?’ the puzzled child thought to herself.
‘She gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!’

‘Can you row?’ the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knitting-needles
as she spoke.

‘Yes, a little--but not on land--and not with needles--’ Alice was
beginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in her
hands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along between
banks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.

‘Feather!’ cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.

This didn’t sound like a remark that needed any answer, so Alice said
nothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about the
water, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, and
would hardly come out again.

‘Feather! Feather!’ the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. ‘You’ll
be catching a crab directly.’

‘A dear little crab!’ thought Alice. ‘I should like that.’

‘Didn’t you hear me say “Feather”?’ the Sheep cried angrily, taking up
quite a bunch of needles.

‘Indeed I did,’ said Alice: ‘you’ve said it very often--and very loud.
Please, where ARE the crabs?’

‘In the water, of course!’ said the Sheep, sticking some of the needles
into her hair, as her hands were full. ‘Feather, I say!’

‘WHY do you say “feather” so often?’ Alice asked at last, rather vexed.
‘I’m not a bird!’

‘You are,’ said the Sheep: ‘you’re a little goose.’

This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for a
minute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of
weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever),
and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall river-banks
frowning over their heads.

‘Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!’ Alice cried in a sudden
transport of delight. ‘There really are--and SUCH beauties!’

‘You needn’t say “please” to ME about ‘em,’ the Sheep said, without
looking up from her knitting: ‘I didn’t put ‘em there, and I’m not going
to take ‘em away.’

‘No, but I meant--please, may we wait and pick some?’ Alice pleaded. ‘If
you don’t mind stopping the boat for a minute.’

‘How am _I_ to stop it?’ said the Sheep. ‘If you leave off rowing, it’ll
stop of itself.’

So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till it
glided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeves
were carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged in elbow-deep
to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking them off--and for
a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting, as she
bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of her tangled hair
dipping into the water--while with bright eager eyes she caught at one
bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.

‘I only hope the boat won’t tipple over!’ she said to herself. ‘Oh, WHAT
a lovely one! Only I couldn’t quite reach it.’ ‘And it certainly DID
seem a little provoking (‘almost as if it happened on purpose,’ she
thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful rushes as
the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one that she couldn’t
reach.

‘The prettiest are always further!’ she said at last, with a sigh at the
obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushed cheeks
and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place, and
began to arrange her new-found treasures.

What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had begun to fade, and
to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that she
picked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a very little
while--and these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost like snow, as
they lay in heaps at her feet--but Alice hardly noticed this, there were
so many other curious things to think about.

They hadn’t gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars got
fast in the water and WOULDN’T come out again (so Alice explained it
afterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught her
under the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of ‘Oh, oh,
oh!’ from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and down among
the heap of rushes.

However, she wasn’t hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on with
her knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. ‘That was
a nice crab you caught!’ she remarked, as Alice got back into her place,
very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.

‘Was it? I didn’t see it,’ Said Alice, peeping cautiously over the side
of the boat into the dark water. ‘I wish it hadn’t let go--I should
so like to see a little crab to take home with me!’ But the Sheep only
laughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.

‘Are there many crabs here?’ said Alice.

‘Crabs, and all sorts of things,’ said the Sheep: ‘plenty of choice,
only make up your mind. Now, what DO you want to buy?’

‘To buy!’ Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and half
frightened--for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished all
in a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.

‘I should like to buy an egg, please,’ she said timidly. ‘How do you
sell them?’

‘Fivepence farthing for one--Twopence for two,’ the Sheep replied.

‘Then two are cheaper than one?’ Alice said in a surprised tone, taking
out her purse.

‘Only you MUST eat them both, if you buy two,’ said the Sheep.

‘Then I’ll have ONE, please,’ said Alice, as she put the money down on
the counter. For she thought to herself, ‘They mightn’t be at all nice,
you know.’

The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said ‘I
never put things into people’s hands--that would never do--you must get
it for yourself.’ And so saying, she went off to the other end of the
shop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.

‘I wonder WHY it wouldn’t do?’ thought Alice, as she groped her way
among the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards the end.
‘The egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Let me
see, is this a chair? Why, it’s got branches, I declare! How very odd to
find trees growing here! And actually here’s a little brook! Well, this
is the very queerest shop I ever saw!’

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *


So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everything
turned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expected
the egg to do the same.




CHAPTER VI. Humpty Dumpty

However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human:
when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyes
and a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she saw clearly
that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. ‘It can’t be anybody else!’ she said
to herself. ‘I’m as certain of it, as if his name were written all over
his face.’

It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormous
face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk, on
the top of a high wall--such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how
he could keep his balance--and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in the
opposite direction, and he didn’t take the least notice of her, she
thought he must be a stuffed figure after all.

‘And how exactly like an egg he is!’ she said aloud, standing with her
hands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him to
fall.

‘It’s VERY provoking,’ Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence, looking
away from Alice as he spoke, ‘to be called an egg--VERY!’

‘I said you LOOKED like an egg, Sir,’ Alice gently explained. ‘And some
eggs are very pretty, you know’ she added, hoping to turn her remark
into a sort of a compliment.

‘Some people,’ said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual, ‘have
no more sense than a baby!’

Alice didn’t know what to say to this: it wasn’t at all like
conversation, she thought, as he never said anything to HER; in fact,
his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree--so she stood and
softly repeated to herself:--


     ‘Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
     Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
     All the King’s horses and all the King’s men
     Couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.’


‘That last line is much too long for the poetry,’ she added, almost out
loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.

‘Don’t stand there chattering to yourself like that,’ Humpty Dumpty
said, looking at her for the first time, ‘but tell me your name and your
business.’

‘My NAME is Alice, but--’

‘It’s a stupid enough name!’ Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently.
‘What does it mean?’

‘MUST a name mean something?’ Alice asked doubtfully.

‘Of course it must,’ Humpty Dumpty said with a short laugh: ‘MY name
means the shape I am--and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a name
like yours, you might be any shape, almost.’

‘Why do you sit out here all alone?’ said Alice, not wishing to begin an
argument.

‘Why, because there’s nobody with me!’ cried Humpty Dumpty. ‘Did you
think I didn’t know the answer to THAT? Ask another.’

‘Don’t you think you’d be safer down on the ground?’ Alice went on, not
with any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her good-natured
anxiety for the queer creature. ‘That wall is so VERY narrow!’

‘What tremendously easy riddles you ask!’ Humpty Dumpty growled out. ‘Of
course I don’t think so! Why, if ever I DID fall off--which there’s no
chance of--but IF I did--’ Here he pursed up his lips and looked so solemn
and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. ‘IF I did fall,’ he
went on, ‘THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--ah, you may turn pale, if you like!
You didn’t think I was going to say that, did you? THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--
WITH HIS VERY OWN MOUTH--to--to--’

‘To send all his horses and all his men,’ Alice interrupted, rather
unwisely.

‘Now I declare that’s too bad!’ Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into a
sudden passion. ‘You’ve been listening at doors--and behind trees--and
down chimneys--or you couldn’t have known it!’

‘I haven’t, indeed!’ Alice said very gently. ‘It’s in a book.’

‘Ah, well! They may write such things in a BOOK,’ Humpty Dumpty said in
a calmer tone. ‘That’s what you call a History of England, that is.
Now, take a good look at me! I’m one that has spoken to a King, _I_ am:
mayhap you’ll never see such another: and to show you I’m not proud, you
may shake hands with me!’ And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as he
leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in doing so)
and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously as she
took it. ‘If he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meet
behind,’ she thought: ‘and then I don’t know what would happen to his
head! I’m afraid it would come off!’

‘Yes, all his horses and all his men,’ Humpty Dumpty went on. ‘They’d
pick me up again in a minute, THEY would! However, this conversation is
going on a little too fast: let’s go back to the last remark but one.’

‘I’m afraid I can’t quite remember it,’ Alice said very politely.

‘In that case we start fresh,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘and it’s my turn
to choose a subject--’ (‘He talks about it just as if it was a game!’
thought Alice.) ‘So here’s a question for you. How old did you say you
were?’

Alice made a short calculation, and said ‘Seven years and six months.’

‘Wrong!’ Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. ‘You never said a word
like it!’

‘I though you meant “How old ARE you?”’ Alice explained.

‘If I’d meant that, I’d have said it,’ said Humpty Dumpty.

Alice didn’t want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.

‘Seven years and six months!’ Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. ‘An
uncomfortable sort of age. Now if you’d asked MY advice, I’d have said
“Leave off at seven”--but it’s too late now.’

‘I never ask advice about growing,’ Alice said indignantly.

‘Too proud?’ the other inquired.

Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. ‘I mean,’ she said,
‘that one can’t help growing older.’

‘ONE can’t, perhaps,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘but TWO can. With proper
assistance, you might have left off at seven.’

‘What a beautiful belt you’ve got on!’ Alice suddenly remarked.

(They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and if
they really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turn
now.) ‘At least,’ she corrected herself on second thoughts, ‘a beautiful
cravat, I should have said--no, a belt, I mean--I beg your pardon!’ she
added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughly offended, and she
began to wish she hadn’t chosen that subject. ‘If I only knew,’ she
thought to herself, ‘which was neck and which was waist!’

Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for a
minute or two. When he DID speak again, it was in a deep growl.

‘It is a--MOST--PROVOKING--thing,’ he said at last, ‘when a person
doesn’t know a cravat from a belt!’

‘I know it’s very ignorant of me,’ Alice said, in so humble a tone that
Humpty Dumpty relented.

‘It’s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. It’s a present
from the White King and Queen. There now!’

‘Is it really?’ said Alice, quite pleased to find that she HAD chosen a
good subject, after all.

‘They gave it me,’ Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossed
one knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, ‘they gave it
me--for an un-birthday present.’

‘I beg your pardon?’ Alice said with a puzzled air.

‘I’m not offended,’ said Humpty Dumpty.

‘I mean, what IS an un-birthday present?’

‘A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.’

Alice considered a little. ‘I like birthday presents best,’ she said at
last.

‘You don’t know what you’re talking about!’ cried Humpty Dumpty. ‘How
many days are there in a year?’

‘Three hundred and sixty-five,’ said Alice.

‘And how many birthdays have you?’

‘One.’

‘And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?’

‘Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.’

Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. ‘I’d rather see that done on paper,’ he
said.

Alice couldn’t help smiling as she took out her memorandum-book, and
worked the sum for him:


               365
                1
               ____

               364
               ___

Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. ‘That seems to
be done right--’ he began.

‘You’re holding it upside down!’ Alice interrupted.

‘To be sure I was!’ Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it round for
him. ‘I thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that SEEMS
to be done right--though I haven’t time to look it over thoroughly just
now--and that shows that there are three hundred and sixty-four days
when you might get un-birthday presents--’

‘Certainly,’ said Alice.

‘And only ONE for birthday presents, you know. There’s glory for you!’

‘I don’t know what you mean by “glory,”’ Alice said.

Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. ‘Of course you don’t--till I tell
you. I meant “there’s a nice knock-down argument for you!”’

‘But “glory” doesn’t mean “a nice knock-down argument,”’ Alice objected.

‘When _I_ use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, ‘it
means just what I choose it to mean--neither more nor less.’

‘The question is,’ said Alice, ‘whether you CAN make words mean so many
different things.’

‘The question is,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be master--that’s
all.’

Alice was too much puzzled to say anything, so after a minute Humpty
Dumpty began again. ‘They’ve a temper, some of them--particularly verbs,
they’re the proudest--adjectives you can do anything with, but not
verbs--however, _I_ can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetrability!
That’s what _I_ say!’

‘Would you tell me, please,’ said Alice ‘what that means?’

‘Now you talk like a reasonable child,’ said Humpty Dumpty, looking very
much pleased. ‘I meant by “impenetrability” that we’ve had enough of
that subject, and it would be just as well if you’d mention what you
mean to do next, as I suppose you don’t mean to stop here all the rest
of your life.’

‘That’s a great deal to make one word mean,’ Alice said in a thoughtful
tone.

‘When I make a word do a lot of work like that,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘I
always pay it extra.’

‘Oh!’ said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.

‘Ah, you should see ‘em come round me of a Saturday night,’ Humpty
Dumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side: ‘for to get
their wages, you know.’

(Alice didn’t venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see I
can’t tell YOU.)

‘You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,’ said Alice. ‘Would you
kindly tell me the meaning of the poem called “Jabberwocky”?’

‘Let’s hear it,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘I can explain all the poems that
were ever invented--and a good many that haven’t been invented just
yet.’

This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse:

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

‘That’s enough to begin with,’ Humpty Dumpty interrupted: ‘there
are plenty of hard words there. “BRILLIG” means four o’clock in the
afternoon--the time when you begin BROILING things for dinner.’

‘That’ll do very well,’ said Alice: ‘and “SLITHY”?’

‘Well, “SLITHY” means “lithe and slimy.” “Lithe” is the same as
“active.” You see it’s like a portmanteau--there are two meanings packed
up into one word.’

‘I see it now,’ Alice remarked thoughtfully: ‘and what are “TOVES”?’

‘Well, “TOVES” are something like badgers--they’re something like
lizards--and they’re something like corkscrews.’

‘They must be very curious looking creatures.’

‘They are that,’ said Humpty Dumpty: ‘also they make their nests under
sun-dials--also they live on cheese.’

‘And what’s the “GYRE” and to “GIMBLE”?’

‘To “GYRE” is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To “GIMBLE” is to
make holes like a gimlet.’

‘And “THE WABE” is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?’ said
Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity.

‘Of course it is. It’s called “WABE,” you know, because it goes a long
way before it, and a long way behind it--’

‘And a long way beyond it on each side,’ Alice added.

‘Exactly so. Well, then, “MIMSY” is “flimsy and miserable” (there’s
another portmanteau for you). And a “BOROGOVE” is a thin shabby-looking
bird with its feathers sticking out all round--something like a live
mop.’

‘And then “MOME RATHS”?’ said Alice. ‘I’m afraid I’m giving you a great
deal of trouble.’

‘Well, a “RATH” is a sort of green pig: but “MOME” I’m not certain
about. I think it’s short for “from home”--meaning that they’d lost
their way, you know.’

‘And what does “OUTGRABE” mean?’

‘Well, “OUTGRABING” is something between bellowing and whistling, with a
kind of sneeze in the middle: however, you’ll hear it done, maybe--down
in the wood yonder--and when you’ve once heard it you’ll be QUITE
content. Who’s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?’

‘I read it in a book,’ said Alice. ‘But I had some poetry repeated to
me, much easier than that, by--Tweedledee, I think it was.’

‘As to poetry, you know,’ said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of his
great hands, ‘_I_ can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comes
to that--’

‘Oh, it needn’t come to that!’ Alice hastily said, hoping to keep him
from beginning.

‘The piece I’m going to repeat,’ he went on without noticing her remark,
‘was written entirely for your amusement.’

Alice felt that in that case she really OUGHT to listen to it, so she
sat down, and said ‘Thank you’ rather sadly.


     ‘In winter, when the fields are white,
     I sing this song for your delight--


only I don’t sing it,’ he added, as an explanation.

‘I see you don’t,’ said Alice.

‘If you can SEE whether I’m singing or not, you’ve sharper eyes than
most.’ Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.


     ‘In spring, when woods are getting green,
     I’ll try and tell you what I mean.’


‘Thank you very much,’ said Alice.


     ‘In summer, when the days are long,
     Perhaps you’ll understand the song:
     In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
     Take pen and ink, and write it down.’


‘I will, if I can remember it so long,’ said Alice.

‘You needn’t go on making remarks like that,’ Humpty Dumpty said:
‘they’re not sensible, and they put me out.’

     ‘I sent a message to the fish:
     I told them “This is what I wish.”

     The little fishes of the sea,
     They sent an answer back to me.

     The little fishes’ answer was
     “We cannot do it, Sir, because--“’


‘I’m afraid I don’t quite understand,’ said Alice.

‘It gets easier further on,’ Humpty Dumpty replied.


     ‘I sent to them again to say
     “It will be better to obey.”

     The fishes answered with a grin,
     “Why, what a temper you are in!”

     I told them once, I told them twice:
     They would not listen to advice.

     I took a kettle large and new,
     Fit for the deed I had to do.

     My heart went hop, my heart went thump;
     I filled the kettle at the pump.

     Then some one came to me and said,
     “The little fishes are in bed.”

     I said to him, I said it plain,
     “Then you must wake them up again.”

     I said it very loud and clear;
     I went and shouted in his ear.’


Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated this
verse, and Alice thought with a shudder, ‘I wouldn’t have been the
messenger for ANYTHING!’


     ‘But he was very stiff and proud;
     He said “You needn’t shout so loud!”

     And he was very proud and stiff;
     He said “I’d go and wake them, if--”

     I took a corkscrew from the shelf:
     I went to wake them up myself.

     And when I found the door was locked,
     I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.

     And when I found the door was shut,
     I tried to turn the handle, but--’


There was a long pause.

‘Is that all?’ Alice timidly asked.

‘That’s all,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘Good-bye.’

This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a VERY strong
hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil
to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. ‘Good-bye, till we meet
again!’ she said as cheerfully as she could.

‘I shouldn’t know you again if we DID meet,’ Humpty Dumpty replied in
a discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake; ‘you’re so
exactly like other people.’

‘The face is what one goes by, generally,’ Alice remarked in a
thoughtful tone.

‘That’s just what I complain of,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘Your face is the
same as everybody has--the two eyes, so--’ (marking their places in the
air with this thumb) ‘nose in the middle, mouth under. It’s always the
same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for
instance--or the mouth at the top--that would be SOME help.’

‘It wouldn’t look nice,’ Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shut his
eyes and said ‘Wait till you’ve tried.’

Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but as he never
opened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said ‘Good-bye!’
once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away:
but she couldn’t help saying to herself as she went, ‘Of all the
unsatisfactory--’ (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort to
have such a long word to say) ‘of all the unsatisfactory people I EVER
met--’ She never finished the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash
shook the forest from end to end.




CHAPTER VII. The Lion and the Unicorn

The next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first in twos
and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in such crowds that
they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind a tree, for fear
of being run over, and watched them go by.

She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers so
uncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something or
other, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him, so
that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.

Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather better than
the foot-soldiers: but even THEY stumbled now and then; and it seemed
to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled the rider fell off
instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice was very glad
to get out of the wood into an open place, where she found the White
King seated on the ground, busily writing in his memorandum-book.

‘I’ve sent them all!’ the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeing
Alice. ‘Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came
through the wood?’

‘Yes, I did,’ said Alice: ‘several thousand, I should think.’

‘Four thousand two hundred and seven, that’s the exact number,’ the King
said, referring to his book. ‘I couldn’t send all the horses, you know,
because two of them are wanted in the game. And I haven’t sent the two
Messengers, either. They’re both gone to the town. Just look along the
road, and tell me if you can see either of them.’

‘I see nobody on the road,’ said Alice.

‘I only wish _I_ had such eyes,’ the King remarked in a fretful tone.
‘To be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, it’s as much
as _I_ can do to see real people, by this light!’

All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along
the road, shading her eyes with one hand. ‘I see somebody now!’ she
exclaimed at last. ‘But he’s coming very slowly--and what curious
attitudes he goes into!’ (For the messenger kept skipping up and down,
and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great hands spread
out like fans on each side.)

‘Not at all,’ said the King. ‘He’s an Anglo-Saxon Messenger--and those
are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he’s happy. His name
is Haigha.’ (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with ‘mayor.’)

‘I love my love with an H,’ Alice couldn’t help beginning, ‘because
he is Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed him
with--with--with Ham-sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he
lives--’

‘He lives on the Hill,’ the King remarked simply, without the least idea
that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitating for
the name of a town beginning with H. ‘The other Messenger’s called
Hatta. I must have TWO, you know--to come and go. One to come, and one
to go.’

‘I beg your pardon?’ said Alice.

‘It isn’t respectable to beg,’ said the King.

‘I only meant that I didn’t understand,’ said Alice. ‘Why one to come
and one to go?’

‘Didn’t I tell you?’ the King repeated impatiently. ‘I must have Two--to
fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.’

At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breath
to say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the most
fearful faces at the poor King.

‘This young lady loves you with an H,’ the King said, introducing Alice
in the hope of turning off the Messenger’s attention from himself--but
it was no use--the Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinary
every moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.

‘You alarm me!’ said the King. ‘I feel faint--Give me a ham sandwich!’

On which the Messenger, to Alice’s great amusement, opened a bag that
hung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured it
greedily.

‘Another sandwich!’ said the King.

‘There’s nothing but hay left now,’ the Messenger said, peeping into the
bag.

‘Hay, then,’ the King murmured in a faint whisper.

Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. ‘There’s nothing
like eating hay when you’re faint,’ he remarked to her, as he munched
away.

‘I should think throwing cold water over you would be better,’ Alice
suggested: ‘or some sal-volatile.’

‘I didn’t say there was nothing BETTER,’ the King replied. ‘I said there
was nothing LIKE it.’ Which Alice did not venture to deny.

‘Who did you pass on the road?’ the King went on, holding out his hand
to the Messenger for some more hay.

‘Nobody,’ said the Messenger.

‘Quite right,’ said the King: ‘this young lady saw him too. So of course
Nobody walks slower than you.’

‘I do my best,’ the Messenger said in a sulky tone. ‘I’m sure nobody
walks much faster than I do!’

‘He can’t do that,’ said the King, ‘or else he’d have been here first.
However, now you’ve got your breath, you may tell us what’s happened in
the town.’

‘I’ll whisper it,’ said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouth
in the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to the King’s
ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the news too.
However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top of his
voice ‘They’re at it again!’

‘Do you call THAT a whisper?’ cried the poor King, jumping up and
shaking himself. ‘If you do such a thing again, I’ll have you buttered!
It went through and through my head like an earthquake!’

‘It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!’ thought Alice. ‘Who are at
it again?’ she ventured to ask.

‘Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,’ said the King.

‘Fighting for the crown?’

‘Yes, to be sure,’ said the King: ‘and the best of the joke is, that
it’s MY crown all the while! Let’s run and see them.’ And they trotted
off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of the old
song:--


   ‘The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown:
   The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
   Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;
   Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town.’


‘Does--the one--that wins--get the crown?’ she asked, as well as she
could, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.

‘Dear me, no!’ said the King. ‘What an idea!’

‘Would you--be good enough,’ Alice panted out, after running a little
further, ‘to stop a minute--just to get--one’s breath again?’

‘I’m GOOD enough,’ the King said, ‘only I’m not strong enough. You see,
a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stop a
Bandersnatch!’

Alice had no more breath for talking, so they trotted on in silence,
till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which the
Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, that
at first Alice could not make out which was which: but she soon managed
to distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.

They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other messenger, was
standing watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece
of bread-and-butter in the other.

‘He’s only just out of prison, and he hadn’t finished his tea when
he was sent in,’ Haigha whispered to Alice: ‘and they only give them
oyster-shells in there--so you see he’s very hungry and thirsty. How
are you, dear child?’ he went on, putting his arm affectionately round
Hatta’s neck.

Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.

‘Were you happy in prison, dear child?’ said Haigha.

Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down
his cheek: but not a word would he say.

‘Speak, can’t you!’ Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched
away, and drank some more tea.

‘Speak, won’t you!’ cried the King. ‘How are they getting on with the
fight?’

Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of
bread-and-butter. ‘They’re getting on very well,’ he said in a choking
voice: ‘each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.’

‘Then I suppose they’ll soon bring the white bread and the brown?’ Alice
ventured to remark.

‘It’s waiting for ‘em now,’ said Hatta: ‘this is a bit of it as I’m
eating.’

There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn
sat down, panting, while the King called out ‘Ten minutes allowed for
refreshments!’ Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying rough
trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was
VERY dry.

‘I don’t think they’ll fight any more to-day,’ the King said to Hatta:
‘go and order the drums to begin.’ And Hatta went bounding away like a
grasshopper.

For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she
brightened up. ‘Look, look!’ she cried, pointing eagerly. ‘There’s the
White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood
over yonder--How fast those Queens CAN run!’

‘There’s some enemy after her, no doubt,’ the King said, without even
looking round. ‘That wood’s full of them.’

‘But aren’t you going to run and help her?’ Alice asked, very much
surprised at his taking it so quietly.

‘No use, no use!’ said the King. ‘She runs so fearfully quick. You might
as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I’ll make a memorandum about
her, if you like--She’s a dear good creature,’ he repeated softly to
himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. ‘Do you spell “creature” with
a double “e”?’

At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his
pockets. ‘I had the best of it this time?’ he said to the King, just
glancing at him as he passed.

‘A little--a little,’ the King replied, rather nervously. ‘You shouldn’t
have run him through with your horn, you know.’

‘It didn’t hurt him,’ the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going
on, when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the
deepest disgust.

‘What--is--this?’ he said at last.

‘This is a child!’ Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice
to introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an
Anglo-Saxon attitude. ‘We only found it to-day. It’s as large as life,
and twice as natural!’

‘I always thought they were fabulous monsters!’ said the Unicorn. ‘Is it
alive?’

‘It can talk,’ said Haigha, solemnly.

The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said ‘Talk, child.’

Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: ‘Do
you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! I never
saw one alive before!’

‘Well, now that we HAVE seen each other,’ said the Unicorn, ‘if you’ll
believe in me, I’ll believe in you. Is that a bargain?’

‘Yes, if you like,’ said Alice.

‘Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!’ the Unicorn went on, turning
from her to the King. ‘None of your brown bread for me!’

‘Certainly--certainly!’ the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. ‘Open
the bag!’ he whispered. ‘Quick! Not that one--that’s full of hay!’

Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,
while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of it
Alice couldn’t guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.

The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very
tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. ‘What’s this!’ he said,
blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that
sounded like the tolling of a great bell.

‘Ah, what IS it, now?’ the Unicorn cried eagerly. ‘You’ll never guess!
_I_ couldn’t.’

The Lion looked at Alice wearily. ‘Are you animal--vegetable--or
mineral?’ he said, yawning at every other word.

‘It’s a fabulous monster!’ the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could
reply.

‘Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,’ the Lion said, lying down and
putting his chin on his paws. ‘And sit down, both of you,’ (to the King
and the Unicorn): ‘fair play with the cake, you know!’

The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between
the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.

‘What a fight we might have for the crown, NOW!’ the Unicorn said,
looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking
off his head, he trembled so much.

‘I should win easy,’ said the Lion.

‘I’m not so sure of that,’ said the Unicorn.

‘Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!’ the Lion replied
angrily, half getting up as he spoke.

Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very
nervous, and his voice quite quivered. ‘All round the town?’ he
said. ‘That’s a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the
market-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.’

‘I’m sure I don’t know,’ the Lion growled out as he lay down again.
‘There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,
cutting up that cake!’

Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great
dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. ‘It’s
very provoking!’ she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite
used to being called ‘the Monster’). ‘I’ve cut several slices already,
but they always join on again!’

‘You don’t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,’ the Unicorn
remarked. ‘Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.’

This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried the
dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she did so.
‘NOW cut it up,’ said the Lion, as she returned to her place with the
empty dish.

‘I say, this isn’t fair!’ cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the knife
in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. ‘The Monster has given the
Lion twice as much as me!’

‘She’s kept none for herself, anyhow,’ said the Lion. ‘Do you like
plum-cake, Monster?’

But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.

Where the noise came from, she couldn’t make out: the air seemed full
of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite
deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in
her terror,

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,
with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she dropped
to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to shut out
the dreadful uproar.

‘If THAT doesn’t “drum them out of town,”’ she thought to herself,
‘nothing ever will!’




CHAPTER VIII. ‘It’s my own Invention’

After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead
silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one
to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming
about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.
However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she
had tried to cut the plum-cake, ‘So I wasn’t dreaming, after all,’ she
said to herself, ‘unless--unless we’re all part of the same dream. Only
I do hope it’s MY dream, and not the Red King’s! I don’t like belonging
to another person’s dream,’ she went on in a rather complaining tone:
‘I’ve a great mind to go and wake him, and see what happens!’

At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of
‘Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!’ and a Knight dressed in crimson armour came
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached
her, the horse stopped suddenly: ‘You’re my prisoner!’ the Knight cried,
as he tumbled off his horse.

Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself
at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.
As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more ‘You’re
my--’ but here another voice broke in ‘Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!’ and Alice
looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.

This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice’s side, and tumbled
off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on again,
and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time without
speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilderment.

‘She’s MY prisoner, you know!’ the Red Knight said at last.

‘Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!’ the White Knight replied.

‘Well, we must fight for her, then,’ said the Red Knight, as he took up
his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of a
horse’s head), and put it on.

‘You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?’ the White Knight
remarked, putting on his helmet too.

‘I always do,’ said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each
other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way
of the blows.

‘I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,’ she said to herself, as
she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: ‘one
Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off
his horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself--and another Rule
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were
Punch and Judy--What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like
a whole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet the
horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were
tables!’

Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that
they always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their both
falling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, they
shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.

‘It was a glorious victory, wasn’t it?’ said the White Knight, as he
came up panting.

‘I don’t know,’ Alice said doubtfully. ‘I don’t want to be anybody’s
prisoner. I want to be a Queen.’

‘So you will, when you’ve crossed the next brook,’ said the White
Knight. ‘I’ll see you safe to the end of the wood--and then I must go
back, you know. That’s the end of my move.’

‘Thank you very much,’ said Alice. ‘May I help you off with your
helmet?’ It was evidently more than he could manage by himself; however,
she managed to shake him out of it at last.

‘Now one can breathe more easily,’ said the Knight, putting back his
shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-looking
soldier in all her life.

He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and
he had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with
great curiosity.

‘I see you’re admiring my little box.’ the Knight said in a friendly
tone. ‘It’s my own invention--to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see
I carry it upside-down, so that the rain can’t get in.’

‘But the things can get OUT,’ Alice gently remarked. ‘Do you know the
lid’s open?’

‘I didn’t know it,’ the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over
his face. ‘Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is no
use without them.’ He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to
throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,
and he hung it carefully on a tree. ‘Can you guess why I did that?’ he
said to Alice.

Alice shook her head.

‘In hopes some bees may make a nest in it--then I should get the honey.’

‘But you’ve got a bee-hive--or something like one--fastened to the
saddle,’ said Alice.

‘Yes, it’s a very good bee-hive,’ the Knight said in a discontented
tone, ‘one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.
And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees
out--or the bees keep the mice out, I don’t know which.’

‘I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,’ said Alice. ‘It isn’t
very likely there would be any mice on the horse’s back.’

‘Not very likely, perhaps,’ said the Knight: ‘but if they DO come, I
don’t choose to have them running all about.’

‘You see,’ he went on after a pause, ‘it’s as well to be provided for
EVERYTHING. That’s the reason the horse has all those anklets round his
feet.’

‘But what are they for?’ Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

‘To guard against the bites of sharks,’ the Knight replied. ‘It’s an
invention of my own. And now help me on. I’ll go with you to the end of
the wood--What’s the dish for?’

‘It’s meant for plum-cake,’ said Alice.

‘We’d better take it with us,’ the Knight said. ‘It’ll come in handy if
we find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.’

This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open
very carefully, because the Knight was so VERY awkward in putting in
the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself
instead. ‘It’s rather a tight fit, you see,’ he said, as they got it in
a last; ‘There are so many candlesticks in the bag.’ And he hung it
to the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and
fire-irons, and many other things.

‘I hope you’ve got your hair well fastened on?’ he continued, as they
set off.

‘Only in the usual way,’ Alice said, smiling.

‘That’s hardly enough,’ he said, anxiously. ‘You see the wind is so VERY
strong here. It’s as strong as soup.’

‘Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?’
Alice enquired.

‘Not yet,’ said the Knight. ‘But I’ve got a plan for keeping it from
FALLING off.’

‘I should like to hear it, very much.’

‘First you take an upright stick,’ said the Knight. ‘Then you make your
hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off is
because it hangs DOWN--things never fall UPWARDS, you know. It’s a plan
of my own invention. You may try it if you like.’

It didn’t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few minutes
she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now and then
stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was NOT a good rider.

Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in
front; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather
suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except
that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as he
generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon
found that it was the best plan not to walk QUITE close to the horse.

‘I’m afraid you’ve not had much practice in riding,’ she ventured to
say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.

The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the
remark. ‘What makes you say that?’ he asked, as he scrambled back into
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice’s hair with one hand, to save himself
from falling over on the other side.

‘Because people don’t fall off quite so often, when they’ve had much
practice.’

‘I’ve had plenty of practice,’ the Knight said very gravely: ‘plenty of
practice!’

Alice could think of nothing better to say than ‘Indeed?’ but she said
it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after
this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice
watching anxiously for the next tumble.

‘The great art of riding,’ the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,
waving his right arm as he spoke, ‘is to keep--’ Here the sentence ended
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of
his head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quite
frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him up,
‘I hope no bones are broken?’

‘None to speak of,’ the Knight said, as if he didn’t mind breaking two
or three of them. ‘The great art of riding, as I was saying, is--to keep
your balance properly. Like this, you know--’

He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice
what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the
horse’s feet.

‘Plenty of practice!’ he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was
getting him on his feet again. ‘Plenty of practice!’

‘It’s too ridiculous!’ cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.
‘You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!’

‘Does that kind go smoothly?’ the Knight asked in a tone of great
interest, clasping his arms round the horse’s neck as he spoke, just in
time to save himself from tumbling off again.

‘Much more smoothly than a live horse,’ Alice said, with a little scream
of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.

‘I’ll get one,’ the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. ‘One or
two--several.’

There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on again.
‘I’m a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed, that
last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?’

‘You WERE a little grave,’ said Alice.

‘Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate--would
you like to hear it?’

‘Very much indeed,’ Alice said politely.

‘I’ll tell you how I came to think of it,’ said the Knight. ‘You see, I
said to myself, “The only difficulty is with the feet: the HEAD is high
enough already.” Now, first I put my head on the top of the gate--then I
stand on my head--then the feet are high enough, you see--then I’m over,
you see.’

‘Yes, I suppose you’d be over when that was done,’ Alice said
thoughtfully: ‘but don’t you think it would be rather hard?’

‘I haven’t tried it yet,’ the Knight said, gravely: ‘so I can’t tell for
certain--but I’m afraid it WOULD be a little hard.’

He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.
‘What a curious helmet you’ve got!’ she said cheerfully. ‘Is that your
invention too?’

The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from the
saddle. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘but I’ve invented a better one than that--like
a sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, it always
touched the ground directly. So I had a VERY little way to fall, you
see--But there WAS the danger of falling INTO it, to be sure. That
happened to me once--and the worst of it was, before I could get out
again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought it was his
own helmet.’

The knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh.
‘I’m afraid you must have hurt him,’ she said in a trembling voice,
‘being on the top of his head.’

‘I had to kick him, of course,’ the Knight said, very seriously. ‘And
then he took the helmet off again--but it took hours and hours to get me
out. I was as fast as--as lightning, you know.’

‘But that’s a different kind of fastness,’ Alice objected.

The Knight shook his head. ‘It was all kinds of fastness with me, I can
assure you!’ he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he said
this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a
deep ditch.

Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was rather
startled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, and she
was afraid that he really WAS hurt this time. However, though she could
see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to hear
that he was talking on in his usual tone. ‘All kinds of fastness,’
he repeated: ‘but it was careless of him to put another man’s helmet
on--with the man in it, too.’

‘How CAN you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?’ Alice asked, as
she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.

The Knight looked surprised at the question. ‘What does it matter where
my body happens to be?’ he said. ‘My mind goes on working all the same.
In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new
things.’

‘Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,’ he went on after
a pause, ‘was inventing a new pudding during the meat-course.’

‘In time to have it cooked for the next course?’ said Alice. ‘Well,
not the NEXT course,’ the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: ‘no,
certainly not the next COURSE.’

‘Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldn’t have two
pudding-courses in one dinner?’

‘Well, not the NEXT day,’ the Knight repeated as before: ‘not the next
DAY. In fact,’ he went on, holding his head down, and his voice getting
lower and lower, ‘I don’t believe that pudding ever WAS cooked! In fact,
I don’t believe that pudding ever WILL be cooked! And yet it was a very
clever pudding to invent.’

‘What did you mean it to be made of?’ Alice asked, hoping to cheer him
up, for the poor Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.

‘It began with blotting paper,’ the Knight answered with a groan.

‘That wouldn’t be very nice, I’m afraid--’

‘Not very nice ALONE,’ he interrupted, quite eagerly: ‘but you’ve no
idea what a difference it makes mixing it with other things--such as
gunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I must leave you.’ They had just
come to the end of the wood.

Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.

‘You are sad,’ the Knight said in an anxious tone: ‘let me sing you a
song to comfort you.’

‘Is it very long?’ Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetry
that day.

‘It’s long,’ said the Knight, ‘but very, VERY beautiful. Everybody that
hears me sing it--either it brings the TEARS into their eyes, or else--’

‘Or else what?’ said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.

‘Or else it doesn’t, you know. The name of the song is called “HADDOCKS’
EYES.”’

‘Oh, that’s the name of the song, is it?’ Alice said, trying to feel
interested.

‘No, you don’t understand,’ the Knight said, looking a little vexed.
‘That’s what the name is CALLED. The name really IS “THE AGED AGED
MAN.”’

‘Then I ought to have said “That’s what the SONG is called”?’ Alice
corrected herself.

‘No, you oughtn’t: that’s quite another thing! The SONG is called “WAYS
AND MEANS”: but that’s only what it’s CALLED, you know!’

‘Well, what IS the song, then?’ said Alice, who was by this time
completely bewildered.

‘I was coming to that,’ the Knight said. ‘The song really IS “A-SITTING
ON A GATE”: and the tune’s my own invention.’

So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck:
then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smile lighting
up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of his song, he
began.

Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through The
Looking-Glass, this was the one that she always remembered most clearly.
Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again, as if it
had been only yesterday--the mild blue eyes and kindly smile of the
Knight--the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining on his
armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her--the horse quietly
moving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the
grass at her feet--and the black shadows of the forest behind--all this
she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, she
leant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in a
half dream, to the melancholy music of the song.

‘But the tune ISN’T his own invention,’ she said to herself: ‘it’s “I
GIVE THEE ALL, I CAN NO MORE.”’ She stood and listened very attentively,
but no tears came into her eyes.


     ‘I’ll tell thee everything I can;
      There’s little to relate.
     I saw an aged aged man,
      A-sitting on a gate.
     “Who are you, aged man?” I said,
      “and how is it you live?”
      And his answer trickled through my head
      Like water through a sieve.

     He said “I look for butterflies
      That sleep among the wheat:
     I make them into mutton-pies,
      And sell them in the street.
     I sell them unto men,” he said,
      “Who sail on stormy seas;
     And that’s the way I get my bread--
      A trifle, if you please.”

     But I was thinking of a plan
      To dye one’s whiskers green,
     And always use so large a fan
      That they could not be seen.
     So, having no reply to give
      To what the old man said,
     I cried, “Come, tell me how you live!”
       And thumped him on the head.

     His accents mild took up the tale:
      He said “I go my ways,
     And when I find a mountain-rill,
      I set it in a blaze;
     And thence they make a stuff they call
      Rolands’ Macassar Oil--
     Yet twopence-halfpenny is all
      They give me for my toil.”

     But I was thinking of a way
      To feed oneself on batter,
     And so go on from day to day
      Getting a little fatter.
     I shook him well from side to side,
      Until his face was blue:
     “Come, tell me how you live,” I cried,
      “And what it is you do!”

     He said “I hunt for haddocks’ eyes
      Among the heather bright,
     And work them into waistcoat-buttons
      In the silent night.
     And these I do not sell for gold
      Or coin of silvery shine
     But for a copper halfpenny,
      And that will purchase nine.

     “I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,
      Or set limed twigs for crabs;
     I sometimes search the grassy knolls
      For wheels of Hansom-cabs.
     And that’s the way” (he gave a wink)
      “By which I get my wealth--
     And very gladly will I drink
      Your Honour’s noble health.”

     I heard him then, for I had just
      Completed my design
     To keep the Menai bridge from rust
      By boiling it in wine.
     I thanked him much for telling me
      The way he got his wealth,
     But chiefly for his wish that he
      Might drink my noble health.

     And now, if e’er by chance I put
      My fingers into glue
     Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
      Into a left-hand shoe,
     Or if I drop upon my toe
      A very heavy weight,
     I weep, for it reminds me so,
      Of that old man I used to know--

     Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,
     Whose hair was whiter than the snow,
     Whose face was very like a crow,
     With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,
     Who seemed distracted with his woe,
     Who rocked his body to and fro,
     And muttered mumblingly and low,
     As if his mouth were full of dough,
     Who snorted like a buffalo--
     That summer evening, long ago,
      A-sitting on a gate.’


As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up the
reins, and turned his horse’s head along the road by which they had
come. ‘You’ve only a few yards to go,’ he said, ‘down the hill and over
that little brook, and then you’ll be a Queen--But you’ll stay and
see me off first?’ he added as Alice turned with an eager look in the
direction to which he pointed. ‘I shan’t be long. You’ll wait and wave
your handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road? I think it’ll
encourage me, you see.’

‘Of course I’ll wait,’ said Alice: ‘and thank you very much for coming
so far--and for the song--I liked it very much.’

‘I hope so,’ the Knight said doubtfully: ‘but you didn’t cry so much as
I thought you would.’

So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into the
forest. ‘It won’t take long to see him OFF, I expect,’ Alice said to
herself, as she stood watching him. ‘There he goes! Right on his head as
usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily--that comes of having so
many things hung round the horse--’ So she went on talking to herself,
as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, and the
Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. After
the fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her
handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.

‘I hope it encouraged him,’ she said, as she turned to run down the
hill: ‘and now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand it
sounds!’ A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. ‘The
Eighth Square at last!’ she cried as she bounded across,

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with little
flower-beds dotted about it here and there. ‘Oh, how glad I am to get
here! And what IS this on my head?’ she exclaimed in a tone of dismay,
as she put her hands up to something very heavy, and fitted tight all
round her head.

‘But how CAN it have got there without my knowing it?’ she said to
herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out what it
could possibly be.

It was a golden crown.




CHAPTER IX. Queen Alice

‘Well, this IS grand!’ said Alice. ‘I never expected I should be a Queen
so soon--and I’ll tell you what it is, your majesty,’ she went on in
a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself), ‘it’ll
never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that! Queens have
to be dignified, you know!’

So she got up and walked about--rather stiffly just at first, as she was
afraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself with the
thought that there was nobody to see her, ‘and if I really am a Queen,’
she said as she sat down again, ‘I shall be able to manage it quite well
in time.’

Everything was happening so oddly that she didn’t feel a bit surprised
at finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, one
on each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they came
there, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there would
be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. ‘Please, would
you tell me--’ she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.

‘Speak when you’re spoken to!’ The Queen sharply interrupted her.

‘But if everybody obeyed that rule,’ said Alice, who was always ready
for a little argument, ‘and if you only spoke when you were spoken to,
and the other person always waited for YOU to begin, you see nobody
would ever say anything, so that--’

‘Ridiculous!’ cried the Queen. ‘Why, don’t you see, child--’ here she
broke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly
changed the subject of the conversation. ‘What do you mean by “If you
really are a Queen”? What right have you to call yourself so? You can’t
be a Queen, you know, till you’ve passed the proper examination. And the
sooner we begin it, the better.’

‘I only said “if”!’ poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.

The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with a
little shudder, ‘She SAYS she only said “if”--’

‘But she said a great deal more than that!’ the White Queen moaned,
wringing her hands. ‘Oh, ever so much more than that!’

‘So you did, you know,’ the Red Queen said to Alice. ‘Always speak the
truth--think before you speak--and write it down afterwards.’

‘I’m sure I didn’t mean--’ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen
interrupted her impatiently.

‘That’s just what I complain of! You SHOULD have meant! What do you
suppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke should
have some meaning--and a child’s more important than a joke, I hope. You
couldn’t deny that, even if you tried with both hands.’

‘I don’t deny things with my HANDS,’ Alice objected.

‘Nobody said you did,’ said the Red Queen. ‘I said you couldn’t if you
tried.’

‘She’s in that state of mind,’ said the White Queen, ‘that she wants to
deny SOMETHING--only she doesn’t know what to deny!’

‘A nasty, vicious temper,’ the Red Queen remarked; and then there was an
uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.

The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, ‘I invite
you to Alice’s dinner-party this afternoon.’

The White Queen smiled feebly, and said ‘And I invite YOU.’

‘I didn’t know I was to have a party at all,’ said Alice; ‘but if there
is to be one, I think _I_ ought to invite the guests.’

‘We gave you the opportunity of doing it,’ the Red Queen remarked: ‘but
I daresay you’ve not had many lessons in manners yet?’

‘Manners are not taught in lessons,’ said Alice. ‘Lessons teach you to
do sums, and things of that sort.’

‘And you do Addition?’ the White Queen asked. ‘What’s one and one and
one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Alice. ‘I lost count.’

‘She can’t do Addition,’ the Red Queen interrupted. ‘Can you do
Subtraction? Take nine from eight.’

‘Nine from eight I can’t, you know,’ Alice replied very readily: ‘but--’

‘She can’t do Subtraction,’ said the White Queen. ‘Can you do Division?
Divide a loaf by a knife--what’s the answer to that?’

‘I suppose--’ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her.
‘Bread-and-butter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone
from a dog: what remains?’

Alice considered. ‘The bone wouldn’t remain, of course, if I took
it--and the dog wouldn’t remain; it would come to bite me--and I’m sure
I shouldn’t remain!’

‘Then you think nothing would remain?’ said the Red Queen.

‘I think that’s the answer.’

‘Wrong, as usual,’ said the Red Queen: ‘the dog’s temper would remain.’

‘But I don’t see how--’

‘Why, look here!’ the Red Queen cried. ‘The dog would lose its temper,
wouldn’t it?’

‘Perhaps it would,’ Alice replied cautiously.

‘Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!’ the Queen
exclaimed triumphantly.

Alice said, as gravely as she could, ‘They might go different ways.’ But
she couldn’t help thinking to herself, ‘What dreadful nonsense we ARE
talking!’

‘She can’t do sums a BIT!’ the Queens said together, with great
emphasis.

‘Can YOU do sums?’ Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen, for
she didn’t like being found fault with so much.

The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. ‘I can do Addition, if you give me
time--but I can’t do Subtraction, under ANY circumstances!’

‘Of course you know your A B C?’ said the Red Queen.

‘To be sure I do.’ said Alice.

‘So do I,’ the White Queen whispered: ‘we’ll often say it over together,
dear. And I’ll tell you a secret--I can read words of one letter! Isn’t
THAT grand! However, don’t be discouraged. You’ll come to it in time.’

Here the Red Queen began again. ‘Can you answer useful questions?’ she
said. ‘How is bread made?’

‘I know THAT!’ Alice cried eagerly. ‘You take some flour--’

‘Where do you pick the flower?’ the White Queen asked. ‘In a garden, or
in the hedges?’

‘Well, it isn’t PICKED at all,’ Alice explained: ‘it’s GROUND--’

‘How many acres of ground?’ said the White Queen. ‘You mustn’t leave out
so many things.’

‘Fan her head!’ the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. ‘She’ll be feverish
after so much thinking.’ So they set to work and fanned her with bunches
of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blew her hair about
so.

‘She’s all right again now,’ said the Red Queen. ‘Do you know Languages?
What’s the French for fiddle-de-dee?’

‘Fiddle-de-dee’s not English,’ Alice replied gravely.

‘Who ever said it was?’ said the Red Queen.

Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. ‘If you’ll
tell me what language “fiddle-de-dee” is, I’ll tell you the French for
it!’ she exclaimed triumphantly.

But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said ‘Queens never
make bargains.’

‘I wish Queens never asked questions,’ Alice thought to herself.

‘Don’t let us quarrel,’ the White Queen said in an anxious tone. ‘What
is the cause of lightning?’

‘The cause of lightning,’ Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quite
certain about this, ‘is the thunder--no, no!’ she hastily corrected
herself. ‘I meant the other way.’

‘It’s too late to correct it,’ said the Red Queen: ‘when you’ve once
said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.’

‘Which reminds me--’ the White Queen said, looking down and nervously
clasping and unclasping her hands, ‘we had SUCH a thunderstorm last
Tuesday--I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.’

Alice was puzzled. ‘In OUR country,’ she remarked, ‘there’s only one day
at a time.’

The Red Queen said, ‘That’s a poor thin way of doing things. Now HERE,
we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, and sometimes
in the winter we take as many as five nights together--for warmth, you
know.’

‘Are five nights warmer than one night, then?’ Alice ventured to ask.

‘Five times as warm, of course.’

‘But they should be five times as COLD, by the same rule--’

‘Just so!’ cried the Red Queen. ‘Five times as warm, AND five times
as cold--just as I’m five times as rich as you are, AND five times as
clever!’

Alice sighed and gave it up. ‘It’s exactly like a riddle with no
answer!’ she thought.

‘Humpty Dumpty saw it too,’ the White Queen went on in a low voice, more
as if she were talking to herself. ‘He came to the door with a corkscrew
in his hand--’

‘What did he want?’ said the Red Queen.

‘He said he WOULD come in,’ the White Queen went on, ‘because he was
looking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasn’t such a
thing in the house, that morning.’

‘Is there generally?’ Alice asked in an astonished tone.

‘Well, only on Thursdays,’ said the Queen.

‘I know what he came for,’ said Alice: ‘he wanted to punish the fish,
because--’

Here the White Queen began again. ‘It was SUCH a thunderstorm, you can’t
think!’ (‘She NEVER could, you know,’ said the Red Queen.) ‘And part of
the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in--and it went
rolling round the room in great lumps--and knocking over the tables and
things--till I was so frightened, I couldn’t remember my own name!’

Alice thought to herself, ‘I never should TRY to remember my name in the
middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?’ but she did not
say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor Queen’s feeling.

‘Your Majesty must excuse her,’ the Red Queen said to Alice, taking
one of the White Queen’s hands in her own, and gently stroking it:
‘she means well, but she can’t help saying foolish things, as a general
rule.’

The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she OUGHT to say
something kind, but really couldn’t think of anything at the moment.

‘She never was really well brought up,’ the Red Queen went on: ‘but
it’s amazing how good-tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how
pleased she’ll be!’ But this was more than Alice had courage to do.

‘A little kindness--and putting her hair in papers--would do wonders
with her--’

The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on Alice’s shoulder.
‘I AM so sleepy?’ she moaned.

‘She’s tired, poor thing!’ said the Red Queen. ‘Smooth her hair--lend
her your nightcap--and sing her a soothing lullaby.’

‘I haven’t got a nightcap with me,’ said Alice, as she tried to obey the
first direction: ‘and I don’t know any soothing lullabies.’

‘I must do it myself, then,’ said the Red Queen, and she began:


   ‘Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap!
   Till the feast’s ready, we’ve time for a nap:
   When the feast’s over, we’ll go to the ball--
   Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!


‘And now you know the words,’ she added, as she put her head down on
Alice’s other shoulder, ‘just sing it through to ME. I’m getting sleepy,
too.’ In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud.

‘What AM I to do?’ exclaimed Alice, looking about in great perplexity,
as first one round head, and then the other, rolled down from her
shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. ‘I don’t think it EVER
happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queens asleep
at once! No, not in all the History of England--it couldn’t, you know,
because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wake up, you
heavy things!’ she went on in an impatient tone; but there was no answer
but a gentle snoring.

The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like a
tune: at last she could even make out the words, and she listened so
eagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, she hardly
missed them.

She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the words
QUEEN ALICE in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was a
bell-handle; one was marked ‘Visitors’ Bell,’ and the other ‘Servants’
Bell.’

‘I’ll wait till the song’s over,’ thought Alice, ‘and then I’ll
ring--the--WHICH bell must I ring?’ she went on, very much puzzled by
the names. ‘I’m not a visitor, and I’m not a servant. There OUGHT to be
one marked “Queen,” you know--’

Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beak
put its head out for a moment and said ‘No admittance till the week
after next!’ and shut the door again with a bang.

Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time, but at last, a very old
Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards
her: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.

‘What is it, now?’ the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.

Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. ‘Where’s the
servant whose business it is to answer the door?’ she began angrily.

‘Which door?’ said the Frog.

Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which he
spoke. ‘THIS door, of course!’

The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute:
then he went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were trying
whether the paint would come off; then he looked at Alice.

‘To answer the door?’ he said. ‘What’s it been asking of?’ He was so
hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ she said.

‘I talks English, doesn’t I?’ the Frog went on. ‘Or are you deaf? What
did it ask you?’

‘Nothing!’ Alice said impatiently. ‘I’ve been knocking at it!’

‘Shouldn’t do that--shouldn’t do that--’ the Frog muttered. ‘Vexes it,
you know.’ Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of his
great feet. ‘You let IT alone,’ he panted out, as he hobbled back to his
tree, ‘and it’ll let YOU alone, you know.’

At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heard
singing:


   ‘To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,
   “I’ve a sceptre in hand, I’ve a crown on my head;
   Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,
   Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.”’


And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus:


  ‘Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
  And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:
  Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea--
  And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!’


Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought to
herself, ‘Thirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any one’s
counting?’ In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrill
voice sang another verse;


  ‘“O Looking-Glass creatures,” quoth Alice, “draw near!
  ‘Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:
  ‘Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
  Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!”’


Then came the chorus again:--


  ‘Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
  Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:
  Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine--
  And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!’


‘Ninety times nine!’ Alice repeated in despair, ‘Oh, that’ll never
be done! I’d better go in at once--’ and there was a dead silence the
moment she appeared.

Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the large
hall, and noticed that there were about fifty guests, of all kinds: some
were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers among them.
‘I’m glad they’ve come without waiting to be asked,’ she thought: ‘I
should never have known who were the right people to invite!’

There were three chairs at the head of the table; the Red and White
Queens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty.
Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longing
for some one to speak.

At last the Red Queen began. ‘You’ve missed the soup and fish,’ she
said. ‘Put on the joint!’ And the waiters set a leg of mutton before
Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carve
a joint before.

‘You look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,’
said the Red Queen. ‘Alice--Mutton; Mutton--Alice.’ The leg of mutton
got up in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned
the bow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.

‘May I give you a slice?’ she said, taking up the knife and fork, and
looking from one Queen to the other.

‘Certainly not,’ the Red Queen said, very decidedly: ‘it isn’t etiquette
to cut any one you’ve been introduced to. Remove the joint!’ And the
waiters carried it off, and brought a large plum-pudding in its place.

‘I won’t be introduced to the pudding, please,’ Alice said rather
hastily, ‘or we shall get no dinner at all. May I give you some?’

But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled ‘Pudding--Alice;
Alice--Pudding. Remove the pudding!’ and the waiters took it away so
quickly that Alice couldn’t return its bow.

However, she didn’t see why the Red Queen should be the only one to give
orders, so, as an experiment, she called out ‘Waiter! Bring back the
pudding!’ and there it was again in a moment like a conjuring-trick. It
was so large that she couldn’t help feeling a LITTLE shy with it, as she
had been with the mutton; however, she conquered her shyness by a great
effort and cut a slice and handed it to the Red Queen.

‘What impertinence!’ said the Pudding. ‘I wonder how you’d like it, if I
were to cut a slice out of YOU, you creature!’

It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn’t a word to say
in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.

‘Make a remark,’ said the Red Queen: ‘it’s ridiculous to leave all the
conversation to the pudding!’

‘Do you know, I’ve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to me to-day,’
Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the moment she opened
her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixed upon her; ‘and
it’s a very curious thing, I think--every poem was about fishes in some
way. Do you know why they’re so fond of fishes, all about here?’

She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark.
‘As to fishes,’ she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouth
close to Alice’s ear, ‘her White Majesty knows a lovely riddle--all in
poetry--all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?’

‘Her Red Majesty’s very kind to mention it,’ the White Queen murmured
into Alice’s other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. ‘It
would be SUCH a treat! May I?’

‘Please do,’ Alice said very politely.

The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked Alice’s cheek. Then
she began:


    ‘“First, the fish must be caught.”
   That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.
    “Next, the fish must be bought.”
   That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.

    “Now cook me the fish!”
   That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
    “Let it lie in a dish!”
   That is easy, because it already is in it.

    “Bring it here! Let me sup!”
   It is easy to set such a dish on the table.
    “Take the dish-cover up!”
   Ah, THAT is so hard that I fear I’m unable!

    For it holds it like glue--
  Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:
    Which is easiest to do,
  Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?’


‘Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,’ said the Red Queen.
‘Meanwhile, we’ll drink your health--Queen Alice’s health!’ she screamed
at the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly,
and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upon
their heads like extinguishers, and drank all that trickled down their
faces--others upset the decanters, and drank the wine as it ran off
the edges of the table--and three of them (who looked like kangaroos)
scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping up
the gravy, ‘just like pigs in a trough!’ thought Alice.

‘You ought to return thanks in a neat speech,’ the Red Queen said,
frowning at Alice as she spoke.

‘We must support you, you know,’ the White Queen whispered, as Alice got
up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.

‘Thank you very much,’ she whispered in reply, ‘but I can do quite well
without.’

‘That wouldn’t be at all the thing,’ the Red Queen said very decidedly:
so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.

(‘And they DID push so!’ she said afterwards, when she was telling her
sister the history of the feast. ‘You would have thought they wanted to
squeeze me flat!’)

In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while she
made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that
they nearly lifted her up into the air: ‘I rise to return thanks--’
Alice began: and she really DID rise as she spoke, several inches; but
she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself down
again.

‘Take care of yourself!’ screamed the White Queen, seizing Alice’s hair
with both her hands. ‘Something’s going to happen!’

And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of things happened
in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking something
like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to the bottles, they
each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as wings, and
so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all directions: ‘and
very like birds they look,’ Alice thought to herself, as well as she
could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.

At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turned to see
what was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen,
there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. ‘Here I am!’ cried a
voice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to see
the Queen’s broad good-natured face grinning at her for a moment over
the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.

There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests were
lying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the table
towards Alice’s chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out of
its way.

‘I can’t stand this any longer!’ she cried as she jumped up and seized
the table-cloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes,
guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.

‘And as for YOU,’ she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen, whom
she considered as the cause of all the mischief--but the Queen was no
longer at her side--she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a
little doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and round
after her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.

At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she was
far too much excited to be surprised at anything NOW. ‘As for YOU,’
she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act of
jumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, ‘I’ll shake
you into a kitten, that I will!’




CHAPTER X. Shaking

She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards and
forwards with all her might.

The Red Queen made no resistance whatever; only her face grew very
small, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went on
shaking her, she kept on growing shorter--and fatter--and softer--and
rounder--and--




CHAPTER XI. Waking

--and it really WAS a kitten, after all.




CHAPTER XII. Which Dreamed it?

‘Your majesty shouldn’t purr so loud,’ Alice said, rubbing her eyes, and
addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. ‘You
woke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And you’ve been along with me,
Kitty--all through the Looking-Glass world. Did you know it, dear?’

It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made the
remark) that, whatever you say to them, they ALWAYS purr. ‘If they would
only purr for “yes” and mew for “no,” or any rule of that sort,’ she had
said, ‘so that one could keep up a conversation! But how CAN you talk
with a person if they always say the same thing?’

On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guess
whether it meant ‘yes’ or ‘no.’

So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found the
Red Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug, and put
the kitten and the Queen to look at each other. ‘Now, Kitty!’ she cried,
clapping her hands triumphantly. ‘Confess that was what you turned
into!’

(‘But it wouldn’t look at it,’ she said, when she was explaining the
thing afterwards to her sister: ‘it turned away its head, and pretended
not to see it: but it looked a LITTLE ashamed of itself, so I think it
MUST have been the Red Queen.’)

‘Sit up a little more stiffly, dear!’ Alice cried with a merry laugh.
‘And curtsey while you’re thinking what to--what to purr. It saves time,
remember!’ And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, ‘just in
honour of having been a Red Queen.’

‘Snowdrop, my pet!’ she went on, looking over her shoulder at the White
Kitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, ‘when WILL
Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the
reason you were so untidy in my dream--Dinah! do you know that you’re
scrubbing a White Queen? Really, it’s most disrespectful of you!

‘And what did DINAH turn to, I wonder?’ she prattled on, as she settled
comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin in her hand,
to watch the kittens. ‘Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty Dumpty? I
THINK you did--however, you’d better not mention it to your friends just
yet, for I’m not sure.

‘By the way, Kitty, if only you’d been really with me in my dream, there
was one thing you WOULD have enjoyed--I had such a quantity of poetry
said to me, all about fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have a real
treat. All the time you’re eating your breakfast, I’ll repeat “The
Walrus and the Carpenter” to you; and then you can make believe it’s
oysters, dear!

‘Now, Kitty, let’s consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is a
serious question, my dear, and you should NOT go on licking your paw
like that--as if Dinah hadn’t washed you this morning! You see, Kitty,
it MUST have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream,
of course--but then I was part of his dream, too! WAS it the Red King,
Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know--Oh, Kitty, DO
help to settle it! I’m sure your paw can wait!’ But the provoking kitten
only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn’t heard the question.

Which do YOU think it was?


              ----


         A boat beneath a sunny sky,
         Lingering onward dreamily
         In an evening of July--

         Children three that nestle near,
         Eager eye and willing ear,
         Pleased a simple tale to hear--

         Long has paled that sunny sky:
         Echoes fade and memories die.
         Autumn frosts have slain July.

         Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
         Alice moving under skies
         Never seen by waking eyes.

         Children yet, the tale to hear,
         Eager eye and willing ear,
         Lovingly shall nestle near.

         In a Wonderland they lie,
         Dreaming as the days go by,
         Dreaming as the summers die:

         Ever drifting down the stream--
         Lingering in the golden gleam--
         Life, what is it but a dream?


              THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Through the Looking-Glass, by
Charles Dodgson, AKA Lewis Carroll

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS ***

***** This file should be named 12-0.txt or 12-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/12/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
